Vanuatu. Waste management situational analysis and findings. Infrastructure. There is a general lack of waste management infrastructure beyond the capital of Port Vila. The main Vanuatu landfill – Bouffa (managed by Port Vila City Council and also used by Shefa Province Council) – has been upgraded to a semi-aerobic landfill, but the remaining areas of Vanuatu rely on insufficiently and inappropriately managed dumpsites, which can be considered potential sources of plastic leakage. Key facts: A large proportion of the rural population has no waste services available. There is no weighbridge at any of the dumpsites; therefore, no waste disposal monitoring is possible. Plastic recycling is still non-existent in Vanuatu, although aggregation and stockpiling exists to a degree. RecycleCorp collects PET plastic and is planning to start a trial exporting it to Australia . Legislation . In July 2018, Vanuatu developed legislation to reduce environmental impacts of single-use plastic materials. The new Order 15 (Waste Management Regulations), issued under the Waste Management Act No. 24 of 2014, bans plastic bags, plastic straws and polystyrene takeaway boxes in its first phase. There is a 90% reduction in lightweight, single-use plastic bag usage when 2020 is compared to 2018 data. There is a lack of associated legislation to manage recyclable material and to support recyclers, in particular:  . There is a failure to manage legacy plastic material dumped into unsanitary landfill, stockpiled or leaked into the environment. The nappy (diaper) ban was put on hold, as an alternative was not available. Waste management budget and levies. In Vanuatu, there is currently no solid waste management budget at the national or provincial level. The revenue for waste management is generated through several channels, such as user-pays system fees obtained from waste collection services, property tax, tipping fees and fines for littering and waste burning. Key considerations include: Councils rent equipment instead of investing in their own. Although fees and taxes exist, the income is only partially collected. A container deposit scheme (CDS) is being developed and introduced with support from JICA’s JPRISM programme. Audit findings. Overall, the tourism and fisheries sectors contribute larger amounts of plastic waste per day than the household and commercial sector . Households dispose of 10,076 tonnes of waste per year of which 998 tonnes are plastics. Commercial business dispose of 7,404 tonnes of waste per year of which 716 tonnes are plastics. In commercial premises, the most common type of plastics disposed of is LDPE in the form of single-use soft plastic packaging, whereas in homes the top items include takeaway containers and other household items. Vanuatu commercial premises dispose of 15 grams of plastic waste per employee per day. Vanuatu residents dispose of 9 grams of plastic waste per person per day. More waste that is plastic is disposed of in Efate than in Espiritu Santo, in both sectors. Tourism . Overall, the tourism sector disposes of 2,613 tonnes of waste per year of which 246 tonnes are plastics. Tourists generate more plastic waste than the residents and commercial businesses per capita per day. Land-based accommodation is responsible for 85% of the tourism sector’s waste disposal. The most common polymer type disposed of by the tourism sector is PET (29.5 %). Fisheries . Almost half of Vanuatu households engage in fishing activities. The fisheries sector disposes of 233 tonnes of consumable plastic waste annually of which 66 tonnes are plastics. Fisheries waste contributed 3.3% of all plastic waste generated in Vanuatu. 90 tonnes of consumable plastic are estimated to be leaked each year, which is more than that disposed of or captured. The most common plastic material disposed of is PET in the form of plastic water bottles. APWC calculates that annual fishing gear imports, including fishing nets, hooks rods and other gear, is equivalent to 31.7 tonnes of which 6.33 tonnes is lost at sea annually. Based on fishing fleet numbers, 6.9 tonnes of fishing gear are lost at sea annually. Current fisheries regulations do not allow provision for marking (ID) fishing gear. Plastics disposal contribution per sector. During 2019, the overall plastic waste disposal rate, across all the sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries, was estimated at around 2,026.5 tonnes per year. Figure 2 presents the disposal rate in tonnes and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector. The most common plastic items in Vanuatu waste are single-use soft plastic packaging (LDPE), PET water bottles and Styrofoam packaging (PS). Overall, we estimated that 58.8% (95% credible interval: 19%–82%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Vanuatu; this equates to 2,846 tonnes. APWC top recommendations . Reform the governance structure by creating a separate waste management authority with operational and monitoring responsibilities for waste across all sectors. Fund the authority through deposit legislation and create clear budgetary reporting requirements. The authority could also hold all data for waste management across all sectors. Engage in a process to collect consistent data across all sectors in the country. Improve technical expertise through training to ensure staff can collect and report on this data. This will also help improve the process of reporting on progress for various initiatives. Divert organics from landfill to provide longevity for the landfill and help manage the ‘difficult to manage/non-recyclable’ plastics and other materials. Promote policies that support the ‘reuse, rethink, repurpose’ concepts and support the local economy in the process. Implement an extended producer responsibility (EPR) system for recyclable materials like bottles, cans, scrap metals, etc. Extend the single-use plastic ban and deposit systems to include tourism-generated waste. Implement an ID system for fishing gear to help determine the scale of the problem of fishing gear. Plastic bans. In 2020, Vanuatu developed a National Plastics Strategy 2020–2030. The strategy outlines five main goals: Reduce, Replace, Remediate, Re-capture, Reward. The current document is still in its draft form with the final version awaiting publication. Vanuatu’s government (Waste Management Regulation Order 15) has made several commitments towards the reduction of plastic waste and its prevention from entering the environment (DEPC, 2018a). From 1 July 2018, DEPC banned several single-use plastic items of priority for the reduction of plastic pollution, such as shopping bags, polystyrene takeaway boxes and plastic straws (Table 4). Exceptions to the ban include plastic bags to wrap fish or meat at point of sale and plastic straws that are an integral part of a product’s packaging, such as juice boxes. Fines range from VUV 50,000 up to VUV 1,000,000, or three months’ imprisonment may be imposed on individuals or corporations caught manufacturing or selling the banned items (APWC, 2019). An audit conducted in PVCC on 10 August 2018 (APWC, DEPC & J-PRISM) revealed that 12% of Port Vila’s waste consisted of plastic material, which represented 2% overall of plastics now prohibited by the plastic ban. A ban on nappies (diapers) was also underway but is currently in abeyance. Roles and responsibilities. Waste management in Vanuatu is a responsibility of multiple stakeholders, including the Vanuatu Government, international partners, private entities and local groups (Table 5). Traditionally, local governments oversaw the management of solid wastes, but with the ever-increasing waste disposal rates, various institutions have become involved in one or more aspects of the management chain, especially awareness raising and outreach, recycling and recovery regulations, and source reduction by intervention at production and consumption levels.   . There are several governmental bodies in Vanuatu with responsibilities for waste management, the most relevant being the Department of Environmental Protection and Conservation (DEPC) (Figure 3), which falls under the jurisdiction of the Ministry for Climate Change Adaptation, Meteorology, Geo-Hazards, Energy, Environment, and Disaster Management. DEPC is responsible for overseeing, coordinating and implementing the Waste Management Act, the Pollution Control Act and the Vanuatu National Waste Management, Pollution Control Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016–2020, aiming to achieve an environmentally sustainable Vanuatu (DEPC, 2020). The department ensures that: - 	all types of wastes are collected, reused, recycled and treated by environmentally sound technologies suited to local conditions; -	waste going to landfill is minimised; and . - 	pollution to the receiving environment is within acceptable limits (DEPC, 2020). Local governments (i.e. municipalities and provincial governments) have responsibility for solid waste management within their local areas, as laid down by the regulatory framework of each municipality or province. They provide household waste collection and recycling services, manage and operate landfill sites, and deliver education and awareness programmes. On each of the main islands, municipal solid waste (MSW) is managed by the municipal councils of the largest cities. MSW for the surrounding province is the responsibility of the provincial government, except in the case of Espiritu Santo, where the provincial and municipal councils have arrived at a mutual understanding to adopt a shared services model. The three municipal councils – Port Vila City Council (PVCC), Luganville Municipal Council (LMC) and Lenakel Town Municipal Council (LTMC) – are responsible for all waste management activities undertaken within their jurisdictions (APWC, 2019). Managing waste is not solely the responsibility of governments. A range of industries and businesses, as well as communities, households and individuals are involved in waste management and resource recovery (Table 5). Traditional leadership also remains an integral part of Vanuatu’s government system. The government receives advice on culture and language from the National Council of Chiefs (Malvatu Mauri). Members of the Council are elected by fellow chiefs who are incumbents on the district council of chiefs (APWC, 2019). Vanuatu is striving to establish sustainable financing of waste management and pollution control from internal sources, which is one of the main goals of the National Waste Management, Pollution Control Strategy and Implementation Plan (NWMPCSIP) 2016–2020 (DEPC, 2016). NWMPCSIP also aims to create revenue streams from waste, such as a container deposit scheme (CDS). However, no solid waste management budget exists at the national or provincial level (ADB, 2014). Instead, waste management operations are funded through several channels, such as user-pays, system fees obtained from waste collection services, property tax or tipping fees. Port Vila City Council – In Port Vila, waste collection is funded from several sources: half-yearly waste collection fees; annual property taxes (5.5% of property value); tipping fees at Bouffa Landfill; and fines from illegal burning. Sometimes, however, households or businesses are either not charged or the bills are not paid. According to the Asian Development Bank, in 2014 only a small percentage of properties were invoiced and only 60% of issued bills were paid. The service of residential and commercial waste collection in PVCC is charged through the pay-as-you-throw or user-pays system. Per this system, a consumer (household or commercial premise) is able to purchase a special bag for disposal of garbage. This payment includes a collection and disposal fee. Once purchased, the bag can be placed in front of the premises on collection day and will be serviced by the municipal council. The total expenditure for waste services in PVCC in 2017 were VUV 23,714,318 and the total income was VUV 31,330,874 (Appendix B: National solid waste agency – waste budget), leaving a net profit of VUV 7,616,556 (Waste Wise Consulting, 2018). Several expenses could be reduced (such as equipment hire) by PVCC investing in the purchase of equipment. Shefa Provincial Council – The provincial government’s source of income is a property tax, which does not specify the provision of a waste service (APWC, 2019). Only a 50% recovery rate is achieved for property tax, which results in a restricted revenue stream. Interviews with APWC consultations revealed contractors often cannot be paid by the government due to lack of available funds. There are approximately three private contractors active in waste management that are not employed by the Shefa province. These contractors are mostly responsible for servicing large resorts and some commercial properties using black bags. The government has plans to introduce a prepaid pink bag in an attempt to redirect revenue that is currently going to PVCC through the yellow bag sales. The government is also aware that it will need to review the tax system if it introduces the pink prepaid bag in order to ring-fence the money. There are also plans to build a landfill in the Shefa province with the support of a French investor, but this venture is in the preliminary stages of investigation. Luganville Municipal Council – Waste management in Luganville has a number of revenue streams, including waste collection fees for households and businesses, landfill gate fees and composting services (Appendix B: National solid waste agency – waste budget). The waste management challenges for LMC are its limited ability to expand the waste collection service due to the lack of available vehicles and the prepaid bag revenue not being set aside for expenditure on waste only. The data collection for LMC has been reasonably effective over the past years, but it still needs improvement. For example, landfill records are filed sporadically and dependent on the availability of a waste management officer. Equipment hire costs could be reduced (as is the case for PVCC), although the annual profit gained by the waste department is not adequate to purchase more equipment. The compliance with waste management fees is quite low (at about 30%) and should be improved. LMCC undertakes composting and collects some revenue from the sale of compost. Both PVCC and LMC have no budget for education and awareness raising. The councils seemed aware of this issue and recognised the need to remedy it. Lenakel Town Municipal Council – Lenakel implements some level of collection service that is supported by a user-pays system. This system is currently not functioning well, and current plans are to shift to using the prepaid bag approach. No information was received on the supporting budget for waste management. The Council issues invoices at the end of the month to the businesses and organisations they serve. The Council uses a non-tipping truck manned by four workers to collect the waste. Upon arrival at the dumpsite, the workers use shovels to remove the waste from the truck, which is a relatively unsafe and time-consuming process. Lakatoro, Malampa Province – The Malampa Province uses the prepaid bag system similar to PVCC and LMC using a white bag. The Council utilises the services of a local contractor to collect the rubbish. No information was received on the supporting budget for waste management in the Malampa Province. Plastic manufacturing, import and recycling in Vanuatu. In 2011, more than USD 9 million worth of plastic and rubber goods were imported into Vanuatu, predominantly from East Asia and the Pacific. Australia, New Zealand, China, New Caledonia and France are some of the most relevant exporters of plastics to Vanuatu (World Bank, 2021a). Similarly, Vanuatu’s plastics and rubber are also exported mainly to Australia, New Caledonia and Fiji (World Bank, 2021b). According to APWC estimates, the overall quantity of imported plastics in 2018 equals 4,698 tonnes. Plastic producers . There are several producers and suppliers producing goods either in plastic packaging or plastic items and materials in Vanuatu. Water in plastic bottles appears to be the most common plastic item produced. Plastic and waste initiatives. The number of plastic and waste reduction initiatives in Vanuatu has increased in the past years, including Wan Smol Bag, No plastic bag, plis, Mama’s Vanuatu, Pango Green Force and 300 Coconut Bag. World Vision Vanuatu initiated a recycling programme Pem Bak Plastik. However, upon the closure of their collaborator Azure Pure Water, the programme ceased to exist. In 2021, a bottle buyback project was implemented through the support of multiple agencies, which successfully recovered one million PET bottles through a refund scheme. Recycling. Recycling in Vanuatu has only recently started to become a more formal structure. On 25 November 2019, the Vanuatu Recycling and Waste Management Association (VRWMA) was successfully launched in Port Vila, largely supported by Japanese agencies and projects J-PRISM II and JICA (DEPC, 2019b). The existence of the association and implementation of future activities were endorsed by the Honourable Charlot Salwai Tabimasmas (Prime Minister of Vanuatu), Mr Andrew Hibgame (Chair of VRWMA and President of RecycleCorp) and Ms Harumi Katsumata, Ambassador of Japan. In Vanuatu, recyclers are classified as private waste operators licensed under DEPC. Vanuatu’s leading and only recycling company is RecycleCorp, active in Port Vila since 2007 (RecycleCorp, 2020). It primarily collects, processes and exports scrap metal, such as heavy steel, car bodies and light steel, copper and brass, aluminium (used beverage cans), gear boxes and irony aluminium, e-waste, lead-acid batteries and used gas bottles. However, the fact that no effective plastic recycling currently occurs in Vanuatu needs to be addressed. The only plastic type collected for recycling is PET, which RecycleCorp is planning to export to Australia as a trial. RecycleCorp also owns a scrap yard in Luganville and has previously collected scrap metal and aluminium from Santo. Its activity beyond Port Vila has been limited in recent years. Waste picking. The collection of recyclable goods in Vanuatu occurs either through waste pickers or landfill scavengers (Figure 5), who play a major role in recycling. RecycleCorp also provides 240-litre wheelie bins to commercial premises (at a cost) in Port Vila. In Port Vila, waste pickers must register at the disposal facility to collect waste (World Bank, 2018). Presenting an easy and steady flow of income, an increasing number of people are venturing into this business, and even more sellers would be present if markets were available within the municipality. Waste pickers often work in unhygienic conditions, with no appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and picking includes collection of food waste from the landfill to feed pet animals such as dogs and pigs. Potential material and resource recovery. A substantial amount of waste could be recovered from the waste stream in areas with waste collection services (i.e. Port Vila and Luganville) and this could be turned into resources, as shown in Figure 6. Based on the 2020 waste audit by APWC, the graph below presents materials currently available in the waste stream that can be recovered under different recover scenarios. Further, Vanuatu does not have 100% collection coverage. Extension of collection services to additional islands would lead to the capture of larger quantities of recyclable materials (beyond that presented below). Waste management infrastructure. Landfills and dumpsites. Once collected, solid waste is transported to a landfill or a controlled disposal site (DEPC, 2016). There are three waste disposal sites in Vanuatu: Bouffa Landfill (Port Vila City Council), Luganville dumpsite (Luganville Municipal Council) and Lenakel dumpsite (Lenakel Town Municipal Council). Proposed improvements for Bouffa Landfill and for Luganville and Lenakel dumpsites are currently underway. In other provincial centres, waste is disposed of in the open at an assigned area. Besides formal disposal, backyard disposal is also still in practice in most homes throughout Vanuatu (DEPC, 2016). Backyard waste is either buried or burned. Bouffa Landfill – Bouffa Landfill is located on the island of Efate, 8.5 kilometres from Port Vila (Figure 7). First opened as a dumpsite in 1995 to serve the largest population centre in Vanuatu, it was subsequently upgraded into a semi-aerobic landfill in 2006. Bouffa Landfill is a disposal point for domestic, commercial and industrial waste collected by the municipal council, as well as waste brought in by the general public. The landfill is used for waste disposal for PVCC and the Shefa Provincial Council (SPC). Each trip costs the contractor around VUV 2,000. The Shefa government pays the landfill tipping fees to the PVCC and is currently considering a proposal for creating its own landfill site. Over the past two decades, a number of donor-funded projects have been carried out at Bouffa Landfill to improve the current infrastructure. In 2006, JICA carried out the rehabilitation of the site, including capacity building, leachate management (leachate pond operational since 2008) and equipment upgrade (tipper truck, excavator and bulldozer). In 2012, regional training on waste landfill maintenance operations was undertaken as part of the J-PRISM I project. The current tipping fee system was introduced in 2014. Waste disposal monitoring and data management were improved. Monitoring and documentation included manual recording of vehicle type and capacity, type of waste and the location where it was collected, gate fee collection and monthly report provision. In 2016, PacWaste provided technical and financial support to improve the site after landfill facilities were damaged by Cyclone Pam in 2015. In 2019, the Council secured a new excavator but it has been experiencing ongoing technical problems and is currently not operational. In December 2020, JICA donated a new bulldozer with a rubbish truck, which is assisting the Council to carry out the required daily maintenance of Bouffa Landfill. The NWMPCIS was planning to install a weighbridge on the site to capture waste data. Installation has not yet taken place because there are challenges with the supply of electricity to the site. Luganville waste disposal site – Luganville dumpsite is a controlled disposal site (DEPC, 2016) (Figure 8). It is located approximately 6 kilometres from the town centre and close to Santo-Pekoa airport. The site has been operational since the end of World War II when the site was initially opened as a limestone quarry. It has been reported that burning waste was the primary waste management tool. In 2017, the dumpsite was extended and is now approximately 4.2 hectares with capacity to last another 20 years (APWC, 2019). There is shared ownership of the disposal site (nine owners), making essential development, such as fencing and construction of other facilities, dependent on the support of the owners. The Luganville Municipal Council (LMC) has been struggling to provide ongoing maintenance of the site by hiring heavy equipment every three to four months. The recent donation by JICA in December 2020 of a new bulldozer with a rubbish truck is now allowing LMC to provide regular maintenance. More improvements are needed to ensure the site functions properly, for example a weighbridge with a gate office, some supporting workers on site and the implementation of regular soil cover. Lenakel dumpsite, Tafea Province – This site is currently used for waste disposal but is not yet legally endorsed by the Department of Environment Protection and Conservation. There are no facilities available on site and many improvements and upgrades are required in the future. Lakatoro dumpsite, Malampa Province – This site is also under customary ownership and yet to be legally endorsed for waste disposal purposes. There are no facilities on site and the area requires extensive improvement and upgrading. Some fencing and a temporary gate have been installed to demarcate the area. Household and commercial sector – Plastic quantification results. Waste service provision. According to the 2016 mini-census, there are 55,285 private households in Vanuatu (VNSO, 2016), of which 10,992 are in Port Vila and 3,024 in Luganville. There were 214 commercial premises in Vanuatu in 2016, including various institutions, businesses and industries, such as schools, hospitals, hotels and other lodging premises, and similar (VNSO, 2016), all generating commercial waste. How is waste collected and disposed of?. The service of residential and commercial waste collection in Port Vila City Council and Luganville Municipal Council is charged through the pay-as-you-throw or user-pays system. Per this system, a consumer (household or commercial premises) is able to purchase from the local supermarket a bag for disposal of garbage. This payment includes a collection and disposal fee. Once purchased, the bag can be placed in front of the premises on collection day and it will be serviced by the municipal council. In LMC, a prepaid bag was introduced in 2012, following an extensive awareness campaign. PVCC implemented their prepaid bag system in early 2014, with full implementation in September 2015. The main purpose of the user-pays approach is to encourage minimisation of landfilled waste through a general reduction of generated waste, home composting and recyclable materials separation prior to waste being taken to the landfill (DEPC, 2016). However, the ability of the residents and businesses to pay for collections also needs to be taken into account (Sinclair et al., 2000); otherwise waste mismanagement, such as dumping and burning, could increase as a negative side effect of waste collection charges. Port Vila City Council – There are 50,944 residents in Port Vila living in 10,965 private households (VNSO, 2016). The prepaid bag system of PVCC offers two sizes of yellow bags for residential and commercial areas and buildings. PVCC originally introduced a prepaid bag in 2010, with limited success. The system was later reintroduced in 2014 via newspaper articles, radio and a TV campaign (Waste Wise Consulting, 2018). Large (70-litre) and small (45-litre) yellow bags can be purchased as a single bag or in a pack of 12 at the local grocery store Au Bon Marche. The cost per bag is VUV 100 (large) or VUV 75 (small), with no bulk discounts. The PVCC receives VUV 40 and VUV 30 for each large and small bag sold, respectively; the remainder goes to the importer and distributor. Most households in Port Vila place a yellow bag out for collection on a weekly basis, making the yellow-bag scheme participation rate close to 100%, as suggested by WWC. Households and businesses place their waste in yellow plastic bags at the front of their premises on raised platforms, on the ground at front doors, at collection points and sometimes in cages (Figure 9). Household waste is collected twice a week, while commercial collections are undertaken every day along with the roadside litter bins. Commercial premises use any bags and the litter bins are lined using black bags. In total, 10 collection trucks are used in PVCC (Figure 10): six flatbeds and four compactors. PVCC employs 19 waste management staff, including the waste collection supervisor and waste management officer. Alongside the council, waste in PVM is also collected by approximately 15 private contractors, such as CK’s Rubbish Removals, as well as one NGO (Pango Green Force). They service certain communities and villages, including the greater Port Vila area. The licence for operation of a waste collection business must be issued through DEPC and only 10 such licences have been issued (the others are currently unlicensed). It is estimated that private waste collectors account for less than 10% of the waste collected. Shefa Provincial Council – In the remainder of Shefa Province (excluding Port Vila), the population is 35,458 residing in 8,948 private households (VNSO, 2016). Waste management here is the responsibility of the Shefa Provincial Council (SPC). When the yellow bag was introduced in Port Vila, the surrounding population in Shefa also started using the bags but they were not collected by PVCC, as they do not operate outside the council boundary. For this reason, the Shefa provincial government hired six contractors to collect waste within the province, with collection trucks provided by the contractors. Bags are placed on platforms at designated collection points. SPC is currently considering introducing its own waste bags as the income from the sale of yellow bags continues to be received by the PVCC. Luganville Municipal Council and Sanma Province – Luganville Municipality has 15,865 residents in 3,024 private households, with 35,280 residents residing in 7,680 households in the remainder of Sanma Province. The joint Luganville Municipal Council and Sanma Provincial Government Waste Management Plan 2013–2016 was adopted by both authorities and they are currently operating together. In the shared services model, LMC expands its waste management services and charges for the service provision to the province. The prepaid bag system is also used in Luganville Municipality and Sanma Province for waste collection. Red bags were introduced in 2012 (Figure 9) to improve collection services after a lengthy awareness campaign and introduction of a by-law (Waste Management By-law (No. 38) of 2013). The bags are offered in a local hardware store, Santo Hardware, in one size only, priced at VUV 80 (single) or VUV 70 and VUV 60 (bulk discount). Of this, LMC receives only VUV 20 per bag, while the remainder goes to the importer and the distributor. Currently, LMC and Sanma Province struggle to service all communities, especially with new residents settling outside the LMC boundary, which effectively extends the current collection service area. The main limiting factor is the availability of LMC waste collection trucks, as only two trucks are available for the entire island. The collection service provided a 48% to 52% coverage for waste collection in 2018 (JICA, 2018). Lenakel Town Municipal Council (LTMC) and Tafea Area Council – The total population of Tafea Province is 36,799, with the majority (32,280) living on the main island of Tanna in 6,007 private households. Lenakel has only 1,000 residents, with 165 registered businesses. Lenakel Town does not have proper collection services nor disposal facilities. Instead, impromptu waste collection in the Lenakel and Tafea peri-urban areas is carried out by LTMC, Lenakel Hospital and Lenakel School. According to the SWM plan, current work is being undertaken to secure provision of waste services in Tanna, Erromango and outer islands. In the rural areas, self-disposal is encouraged at the designated storage site. Malampa Province – Council has undertaken a contract with a local business to collect waste within the main town area of Lakatoro. The council has recently introduced a prepaid bag, which businesses and residents purchase in order for their waste to be collected. There is a plan, in line with the current waste management plan, to extend the services to the outer areas when the prepaid bag system improves. Targeted assistance is needed for Malampa in terms of proper rubbish trucks. Illegal dumpsites are being remediated, and education and awareness raising are under way. Clean-ups have also been organised by local schools, public rubbish bins have been distributed, and market waste is composted. Remaining provinces – Torba and Penama . There is little information on waste management services available in these two provinces. It is most likely that organised collection and disposal are not available or are rudimentary. Waste disposal practices. Households and commercial premises. The results of interviews with Vanuatu residents and commercial property managers demonstrate that the majority of waste is usually collected by local waste service providers (Figure 11). Only 0.7% of household organic waste is dumped in the water; 5% of commercial plastic waste and 2% of commercial general waste is burned. The method of disposal for 18% of bulky household waste remains unknown, but it is potentially dumped in the environment. Most household plastic waste is collected, some is burned (0.6%), some self-hauled (0.6%), and for the rest it has not been specified. APWC 2020 audit – Household and commercial methodology. Sampling methodology. APWC implemented the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) Waste Audit Methodology: A Common Approach Audit (PRIF, 2019) to undertake the waste sample collection and waste sorting. A detailed explanation of the audit methodology approach for household and commercial sample collection, sorting and auditing can be located in Appendix C: Project methodology. Work health and safety. During audits, the consulting team at APWC uses an integrated management system, which covers quality, health, safety and environment (QHSE). This system has been developed to be consistent with the requirements of the international standards ISO9001 (Quality), ISO14001 (Environment) and AS4801 (Occupational Health and Safety). Training. The field team conducted a number of training sessions via web meetings. Training included interview, collection and sorting training, as per APWC methodology. A list of individuals trained is provided in Appendix C: Project methodology – staff training. Waste sampling distribution and sample collection. Sample number and distribution was based on the size of the population, distribution of the population on urban and rural islands, low-, medium- and high-income households, variability of samples collected during the previous audits and our ability to complete fieldwork in a limited amount of time. During the fieldwork in Vanuatu in September and October 2020, the in-country staff collected a wide range of data from households and commercial premises through audits and interviews (Figure 12). In addition, landfill and stockpile assessments were also undertaken (Table 9). Audit results – Household and commercial waste disposal and leakage . Overall waste disposal . In 2020, the overall household and commercial waste disposal rate in Vanuatu equalled 17,481 tonnes per year. The dominant category was organics (31.3%), which mainly consisted of food scraps, plant material from gardening, old baskets and other biodegradable natural materials (Figure 13). The second most common material category is paper and cardboard, contributing 23.1%, followed by metals (13.8%) and plastics (9.8%). It should be noted that many of the hygiene products, textiles, e-waste and construction materials are either entirely or partially composed of synthetic polymers, meaning the proportion of plastics in Vanuatu household and commercial waste is in fact greater than 9.8%. However, to ensure that the analysis was accurate for pure polymer types, these categories were kept separate from the other plastics. For a more detailed breakdown of all categories, see Appendix D: Material types and sort form. Household vs. commercial waste . As expected, disposal rates in the household sector are considerably higher than the commercial sector because there are more residential properties than commercial premises in Vanuatu. It was estimated that households generate 10,076 tonnes of waste annually, while the commercial sector creates 7,404 tonnes per year. Households have a higher proportion of organic waste (36%) in the waste stream than the commercial sector (24.8%), while paper and cardboard are more common in commercial premises (28.9%) than in households (18.4%) (Figure 14). In households, plastics comprise 9.9% (998 tonnes/y) of all waste. Similarly, in the commercial sector, plastic waste contributes 9.6% (716 tonnes/y) to all waste. Figure 14: Waste disposal rate (tonnes/year) and waste composition (percentage) separated for household and commercial sectors in Vanuatu. Waste disposal can also be expressed as the amount of waste disposed of by an individual over a certain period, which is called here ‘disposal intensity’ and measured in kilograms per person per day. Household and commercial waste disposal intensity in Vanuatu in 2019 was 0.094 kilogram per person per day and 0.152 kilogram per employee per day, respectively. Therefore, an employee at commercial premises generates almost  one-third more waste than when at home. Plastic waste disposal and leakage . Plastic disposal by weight. The most prevalent plastic waste disposed of in Vanuatu (according to polymer type) is made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) (Figure 15). It comprises almost half of commercial waste and almost one-third of household waste. Households generally produce more plastic waste in Vanuatu than commercial premises (Table 10). Due to greater population and possibly better access to more packaged materials in the capital Port Vila, Efate households and businesses dispose of considerably more plastic waste than in Espiritu Santo (Figure 16). Households on Efate generate 723 tonnes per year, while households on Espiritu Santo generate 274 tonnes per year. Commercial premises on Efate generate 597 tonnes per year, while commercial businesses on Espiritu Santo generate 119 tonnes per year. Top 10 plastic items. The most common plastic items found in household and commercial waste are soft plastic packaging made of LDPE, ‘Plastic Other (7)’, and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) water bottles, which are considered single-use items (plastic packaging made to be used once) (Table 11). Most other items on the Top 10 list could also be defined as single-use plastics. Key gaps and recommendations – Household and commercial sector. A drastic reduction in the production and use of plastics, particularly single-use plastic items and packaging, is the absolute priority when it comes to plastic pollution management. There are multiple ways to avoid the generation of plastic waste, including the following: Reform the governance structure by creating a separate waste management authority with operational and monitoring responsibilities for waste across all sectors. Fund the authority through deposit legislation and create clear budgetary reporting requirements. The authority could also hold all data for waste management across all sectors. Engage in a process to collect consistent data across all sectors in the country. Improve technical expertise through training to ensure that staff can collect and report on this data. This will also help improve the process of reporting on progress for various initiatives. Diversion of organics from landfill would provide longevity for the landfill and help manage the ‘difficult to manage/non-recyclable’ plastics and other materials. Promote policies that support the ‘reuse, rethink, repurpose’ concepts and support the local economy in the process. Overall, APWC recommends a systemic change through the creation of a waste management authority, with responsibility for undertaking all waste management tasks for all sectors. Currently, the roles of waste management personnel are ill defined and there are insufficient staffing levels and resourcing to carry out the requisite work. Gaps and recommendations on plastic and solid waste reduction and management, from upstream to downstream waste management, are presented in below. Tourism sector – Plastic quantification results. Tourism in Vanuatu. Tourism is the key economic driver in Vanuatu’s development. In 2018, tourism accounted for 46% of gross domestic product (GDP) and accommodated 35% of all employees (SPTO, 2018), making it the fastest growing sector in Vanuatu. Visitors to Vanuatu – predominantly those from Australia, New Zealand and New Caledonia – are drawn to Vanuatu’s outstanding hospitality, cultural diversity and unique geographical features, particularly the ocean environment (IUCN, 2012; NZTRI, 2016). Until 2019, international visits to Vanuatu were steadily increasing (Figure 17). With the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and the resultant border closures, tourism has decreased substantially. The unfavourable situation continues. Tourist activities are mainly concentrated in the country’s population centres, such as Efate and Port Vila, Luganville and the east coast of Espiritu Santo and Tanna (Gassner et al., 2019). However, the tourism industry contributes to both the rural and urban economies (IUCN, 2012). Urban tourism encompasses shopping, dining and accommodation, while rural tourism, which lacks infrastructure to support these activities, mainly relies on day trips (IUCN, 2012). A smaller number of tourist facilities are also present on Pentecost, Ambrym and Malekula Islands. People’s Plan promotes rural development and integration of the tourism sector into the rural economy, as well as improvement and expansion of a range of sustainable tourism products and services throughout Vanuatu (DSPPAC, 2016). There are three broad categories of tourism activities in Vanuatu: land-based tourism, airline tourism and sea-based tourism. Land-based tourism refers to accommodation, restaurants, shopping, daily land trips; airline tourism is associated with air travel; and sea-based tourism refers to activities related to cruise ships, yachts, surfing, diving, snorkelling and other ocean activities. Land-based tourism – Sightseeing and outdoor activities, the primary focus of Vanuatu tourism, secured 10,000 jobs (13.6% of total employment) and contributed 44.5% of GDP in 2016 (World Travel and Tourism Council, 2017). Nevertheless, accommodation is still one of the main revenue-generating services in Vanuatu tourism. Airline tourism – In the first quarteruarter of 2020, air visitors made up 27% of international visits in Vanuatu, of which 50% were Australians travelling mainly for leisure purposes (VNSO, 2020). In 2015, air arrivals generated USD 150 million or VUV 17 billion, including pre- and in-country spending (IFC, 2015). Sea-based tourism – Vanuatu’s marine tourism generates VUV 1.1 billion per year in gross value (Gassner et al., 2019). Recreational activities include scuba diving, snorkelling, day-boat charters, day tours and recreational boating, including supporting accommodation and other hospitality services (Gassner et al., 2019). Of particular importance for sea-based tourism is cruise-ship tourism. Comparing first uarters of 2019 and 2020, there was a 65% increase in the overall number of day visitors, which is attributed to the increase in cruise-ship visits to Vanuatu (VSNO, 2020). There are eight cruise-ship ports in Vanuatu, with Port Vila and Mystery Island the most frequently visited (Figure 18). Yacht tourism is also quite important in Vanuatu, with two established marinas in Port Vila offering services to sailors: the Point and the Yachting World Sea Wall (Gassner et al., 2019). Institutional framework. The Vanuatu tourism industry is the responsibility of the Department of Tourism (DOT) in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade, Industry and Ni-Vanuatu Business; the responsibility for waste generated by the industry is shared by multiple actors (see Table 12 in Appendix C: Project Methodology – roles and responsibilities). In 2019, the Department of Tourism developed the Sustainable Tourism Policy 2019–2030 with the aim of protecting and celebrating “Vanuatu’s unique environment, culture, kastom and people through sustainable and responsible tourism” (DOT, 2019). The policy also highlights the importance of the awareness campaigns on the ban of plastic straws, polystyrene containers and plastic bags, along with the 3Rs (reduce, reuse, recycle) and waste minimisation efforts, explained in detail in the Vanuatu National Plastics Strategy (2020–2030). The growing marine tourism industry, especially cruise and yacht tourism and the potential environmental hazards associated with it, is highlighted in Vanuatu’s National Ocean Policy, which emphasises the importance of responsible behaviour by individuals and businesses towards the environment. Several legally-binding national documents are also relevant to the tourism industry, such as the Pollution Control Act, Waste Management Act, Port Act, Maritime Act, Ozone Layer Protection Act and Environmental Management and Conservation Act. Vanuatu is a signatory to MARPOL and can accept cruise-ship waste. However, under a regional agreement brokered by SPREP, most ship-generated waste is diverted to Fiji. Waste service provision. Apart from generating revenue, the growing tourism industry also creates large quantities of waste, which puts pressure on Vanuatu’s solid waste management system. If the infrastructure capacity cannot keep pace with the increase in urban population and international visitation, this could affect not only residents and the natural environment but tourism as well. It is noted in the Vanuatu International Visitor Survey Factsheet that “visitors suggest better roads, public services, rubbish collection and access to the internet” (IFC, 2015). Land-based tourism. Land-based tourism includes restaurants, resorts and accommodation premises. The waste services to these premises are provided by PVC and some private contractors. In Port Vila, some commercial premises separate recyclable waste into 240-litre wheelie bins provided and collected by RecycleCorp, at a cost. In Luganville, fees are charged at the disposal site and range from VUV 80 per bag to VUV 1,800 per flatbed (PRIF, 2018). Airline tourism – Airports . There are three international airports in Vanuatu: Bauerfield International Airport in Port Vila (Figure 19), Santo-Pekoa International Airport in Luganville, and Whitegrass Airport on Tanna (Gassner et al., 2019). Smaller airports also exist on many of the smaller islands. Bauerfield is the country’s primary international airport, providing flights to and from eight international locations. PVCC trucks service the airport in Port Vila and LMC vehicles service the Santo-Pekoa airport. PVCC collects waste from the Bauerfield airport twice a week. The waste from international flights is disposed of in bins placed at the runway. These are taken for incineration by officials from the department of quarantine. However, our survey noted that the incinerator is currently not working, so the waste is instead transferred to the landfill at Bouffa where disposal through deep burial is supervised by the quarantine officials. Smaller airports have domestic flights only, and waste receives similar treatment to commercial waste. Sea-based tourism – Ports. In Vanuatu, there are four international ports providing customs and immigration clearance for yachts and berthing for cruise ships: port of Port Vila (Shefa Province) (Figure 24); port of Santo (Luganville, Sanma Province); Vanua Lava (Torba Province); and Tanna (Tafea Province). With more than 200 port calls from international vessels in 2018 (cruise liners and others), the port of Port Vila has a moderate demand for waste reception facilities. However, most of these demands are not catered for due to a lack of infrastructure and services. Not only does the port struggle to manage ship waste, but port-generated waste is also a burden. The one exception is dry waste, generated mostly by cruise liners and visiting naval vessels, which is accepted for disposal on land. Port of Port Vila deals with this problem by using the Pacific Regional Reception Facilities arrangements set up by IMO regulations and SPREP in 2016. Per this arrangement, there were five ports in the South Pacific Region designated as ports with facilities adequate enough to meet the IMO standards: Port of Apia, Port Moresby, Noumea, Papeete and Suva. Therefore, ships visiting Vanuatu are expected to retain most of their waste on board, for disposal mainly in Fiji but potentially at other ports (APWC, 2018). APWC 2020 audit – Tourism methodology. Data collected . The data for the tourism sector assumed the following inclusions per sector: Land-based tourism data – waste auditing for resorts, hotels and B&Bs. Sea-based tourism data – waste auditing for cruise liners, yachts and passenger ships. Air-based tourism data – estimation for total waste from air travellers. As a result of Covid-19, no cruise ships or yachts were allowed to dock in Vanuatu and fishing activities were temporarily suspended. The only samples that were collected were from eight resorts, five hotels and four B&Bs. No cruise or yacht samples were collected. The waste produced by tourists during short-, medium- and long-haul flights was used to determine the air-based tourism waste. Flight info was purchased from www.flightradar24.com/ and is presented below. The composition of waste was generated based on airplane cabin waste characterisation: Knowing the waste for sustainable management and future recommendations. Waste Management, 96, 57–64. No waste audits were conducted for airline waste in Vanuatu. Data analysis principles. Tourism data was analysed using the following principles. The overall leakage calculations were undertaken using the model presented in Appendix H: Bayesian model of tourist waste generation. Tourism waste disposal and leakage . Overall waste disposal. plastics contribute 9.4% to overall quantity of waste disposed . Land-based tourism . As we have no direct measurements for tourist waste generated overall in Vanuatu in years prior to 2020, we estimated a figure of 2,207 tonnes per year of waste generated by tourists in accommodation each year. This is derived from the waste disposed of by resorts in Samoa, adjusted for Vanuatu’s 1.46 million annual tourist-days compared with Samoa’s 1.53 million annual tourist-days. By this method, Vanuatu’s rate of land-based waste disposal is 1.509 kilograms per tourist per day, comparable to the rates of waste disposal by tourists in other countries, and much higher than Vanuatu’s residential disposal rate of 0.0944 kilogram per person per day. Air-based tourism. Airline waste disposal was calculated from the number of incoming aircraft and applying the composition and disposal rates reported by Blanca-Alcubilla et al. (2019). From IATA data, there were 1,480 short flights (less than 3 hours in duration) and 1,007 medium-length flights (3–7 hours) to Vanuatu in 2019. Airline waste disposal is estimated to be about 184 tonnes per year, of which 103 tonnes are plastics. Airline waste disposal intensity equals 1.527 kilograms per tourist arrival. Sea-based tourism (yachts and cruise ships). The amount of waste generated by cruise ships was calculated by assuming that each cruise ship carried approximately the same waste quantities and composition as in Antigua, in the Caribbean, where a visual audit of cruise waste was conducted pre-COVID. In comparison to Antigua’s 733,526 annual cruise arrivals, Vanuatu saw an average of 120,628 cruise arrivals between 2016 and 2019. According to a previous study by APWC on Vanuatu port reception facilities and ship-waste management in 2018 (with the assumption that cruise liners generate approximately 3 kilograms of waste per person per day), a cruise ship with 2,000 people on board on arrival to port would dispose of 18 tonnes of waste generated in three days at sea (APWC, 2018). With an annual average of 116 cruise ships in port of Port Vila and port of Santo, this would give a total of more than 2,000 tonnes of cruise-ship waste annually, which is 20 times more than all other international vessels combined. However, the study also showed that only 13% of the overall estimated waste was actually offloaded in the ports, suggesting that the remaining 87% is either withheld for disposal at regional ports, destroyed on vessels by incineration, or dumped at sea. Audit results show that land-based tourism waste (2,206.9 tonnes/year) generally outweighs airline (184.2 tonnes/year), cruise-ship waste (216.8 tonnes/year) and yacht waste (4.7 tonnes/year). The most dominant waste type in land tourism waste is organic (48%), in airline waste plastics (56.1%), in cruise-ship waste glass (26%) and in yacht waste organics (30.4%) (Figure 24). Plastic waste disposal and leakage. There are only a few reliable sources for the rate of waste generation (as opposed to disposal) by cruise ships, which makes the amount of waste leakage difficult to estimate. CE Delft 2017 performed audits of waste logs for many vessel classes, including cruise ships, and provided estimates of the volume of waste produced per passenger, although these estimates are imprecise. After accounting for uncertainty in waste disposal from our data and overall generation rates from CE Delft 2017, the median estimate for leakage or incineration of plastics was 51.5%. As it was not possible to obtain a precise figure for the rate of waste generation, our data are consistent with cruise-ship leakage rates anywhere from 0% to 91%. The median estimate of leakage, or incineration, for non-plastic wastes was 20%, with a range of 0% to 91%. For organic wastes, we are highly confident that most generated waste is not offloaded; our leakage or incineration estimate ranges from 90% to 95%. It is important to note that under some circumstances it is permitted to dump organic wastes in the ocean, so it is not surprising that there is very high ‘leakage’ in this category. The estimated annual quantity of ashes offloaded from cruise ships was 120 tonnes per year. The original weight of material to produce this much ash depends to a large degree on the composition of the material incinerated. CE Delft 2017 reports that one ship recorded a 99.5% reduction in volume across all materials incinerated. Given that ashes are relatively dense when compared to mixed waste, this might correspond to a 97% reduction in weight. This suggests that incineration might account for approximately 4,000 tonnes per year of material. The median estimate of incineration or leakage was only 2,753 tonnes per year, but the incinerated quantity is well within the upper estimate of 10,641 tonnes per year. Composition of disposed plastic waste by polymer across sub-sectors. The overall disposal of plastic waste by the tourism sector equals 246.4 tonnes per year. The largest amounts of plastics were disposed of by land-based tourism (111 tonnes/year), closely followed by airline tourism (103 tonnes/year); cruise-ship tourism did not contribute considerably (31 tonnes/year) to the plastics waste stream of the  tourism industry (Figure 23). However, with the knowledge that cruise liners are important producers of plastic waste, these results most likely reflect that Vanuatu’s international ports accept only small amounts of waste from international vessels. As noted earlier, this would suggest plastics are either disposed of at another regional port, incinerated on board the vessel or dumped at sea. Plastic waste disposed of by yachts was 0.8 tonne per year. Regarding the polymer type, PET appears to be the most common material in all four sub-sectors. Plastic waste leakage. Assuming that the leakage of plastics from the tourism sector is comparable to the country’s overall plastic leakage rate, it was estimated that more than 500 tonnes of plastic waste per year are released from the tourism sector (Table 16) into the environment or  are disposed of improperly (burning, burying, etc.). Fisheries . Fisheries overview. Vanuatu’s exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers an area of 680,000 square kilometres, while the area of inner reefs and lagoons is approximately 448 square kilometres and mangroves covering an area of 25 square kilometres (Amos, 2007). Approximately 64% of Vanuatu residents live within one kilometre of the coast (Andrew et al., 2019). The importance of nearshore fishing activities to the lives of rural people and the national economy in Vanuatu cannot be underestimated, although the estimates of fish production and consumption patterns are not reliable (Amos, 2007; Gillett, 2016). Zeller et al. (2016) suggest that actual production from coastal fisheries in the Pacific islands region generally may be 2.5 times the production reported in official statistics, such as those maintained by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO). According to the latest available census, almost half of Vanuatu households engage in fishing activities, mainly in rural areas (VNSO, 2016) (Table 17). Most fishing takes place in Torba Province, and the least in Penama and Shefa, which are the two most urbanised provinces. Annual per capita consumption of seafood was 32.1 kilograms in 2013 (FAO, 2018). Two per cent (2%) of urban households and 12% of rural households generate income from the sale of fishery products (Gillett, 2016). The contribution of fisheries to the GDP in 2012 was less than 1% (USD 5.5 million). Export value of fishery products in 2015 was estimated at USD 100 million and import value at USD 5.1 million (FAO, 2018). The Vanuatu fishing industry exploits oceanic and coastal resources at the subsistence, artisanal and industrial levels (MALFB, 2014). Recent years have seen a considerable drop in fisheries production. There have also been attempts at farming marine and freshwater species, but due to numerous challenges, the aquaculture sub-sector is also in decline (MACBIO, 2019; FAO, 2020). A total of 161 motorised vessels were reported in 2018, with 59% being under 12 metres in length (FAO, 2020). There are also 119 registered non-motorised vessels under 12 metres. Inshore fisheries consist of subsistence and artisanal fisheries. Subsistence fisheries include nearshore reef-fishing activities that target reef, lagoon, small pelagic fish, shellfish and other edible lagoon invertebrates. Artisanal fisheries are commercial yet small-scale, primarily targeting shallow and deep-water bottom snapper species, and sessile species such as trochus snails, green snails and beche-de-mer (sea cucumber/trepang) (Amos, 2007). Gillett (2009) noted that no original field research had been carried out to estimate subsistence fisheries production in Vanuatu in almost a quarter of a century. This remained the case in 2020. The lack of a sustained data collection programme for coastal fisheries production in Vanuatu constrains a comprehensive assessment of the status and trends in Vanuatu’s nearshore fisheries. Anecdotally, however, there is a widely-held view that coastal marine resources in Vanuatu are increasingly overexploited, particularly close to urban areas (Gillett, 2016). Offshore fisheries include locally-based longliners, big game/sport fishing, foreign-access industrial fishing and some artisanal FAD (fish aggregating device) fisheries (Amos, 2007). Local longliners fish pelagic species (albacore and yellowfin tunas) and some bottom-dwelling species (snappers and groupers) using longlining techniques. Sport fishing involves recreational fishing for tourists on commercial charter boats, targeting billfish, tunas and large coastal pelagic fish species. Some vertical drop lining for deep-water bottom fish is also included. Foreign fisheries in Vanuatu waters mainly include longlining, but also some multilateral purse seining. Artisanal fishermen catch pelagic fish (skipjack, yellowfin tuna and baitfish) using anchored fish aggregating devices (aFADs) deployed within the 12-mile territorial sea (WCPFC, 2020).  	. Commercial fishing is currently supported under bilateral fishing agreements primarily with companies based in Fiji and Solomon Islands using vessels flagged to other entities, including China and Taiwan. Fishing in Vanuatu waters is dominated by longline vessels that are authorised to operate beyond 24 miles (39 kilometres) from shore within the EEZ. Since the closure of locally-based longlining fisheries in early 2014, all of the offshore catch in Vanuatu waters and by Vanuatu-flagged offshore vessels (longliners and purse seiners) has been landed outside Vanuatu. Longliners land either in other PICs (especially Fiji and the Solomon Islands) or in Asian ports, while most of the catch by Vanuatu-flagged purse-seine vessels are transhipped at a port in neighbouring countries and eventually landed in Bangkok (Thailand) or Pago Pago (American Samoa) (FAO, 2018). Aquaculture in Vanuatu still exists, but the production has severely declined. The Department of Fisheries is currently promoting aquaculture development of fish species to address poverty, food security and diversity of eco-activities (MALFB, 2016 Corporate Plan). Fishing activity in Vanuatu. The Vanuatu Government also operates an international (Vanuatu-flagged) fishing fleet of 75 longliners and three purse seiners that operate in the Vanuatu EEZ as well as other international waters. Vanuatu has approximately 32 officers participating in the National Observer Programme where they record transgressions to MARPOL regulations, including those related to ship-generated waste. The Vanuatu Government also permits up to 75 foreign-flagged fishing vessels (mostly Chinese) and 40 locally-based vessels to fish within the zone. While the Vanuatu-flagged vessels are well represented by National Observers, coverage of many of the foreign-flagged vessels is poor. As a result, there is minimal information available on how effectively these foreign-flagged vessels manage their wastes in accordance with MARPOL requirements. Based on a number of sources, the domestic and international fishing fleet numbers used in this report are provided in Table 18 and Table 19 below. It should be noted that only international fishing vessels flagged to Vanuatu were considered for this analysis. Plastics and fisheries   . Although it is widely accepted that marine plastic pollution predominantly originates from land-based activities (directly and indirectly), marine activities, including petroleum exploration and production, shipping and fishing (lost and discarded gear), also make a considerable contribution (20%). APWC calculates that annual fishing gear imports, including fishing nets, hooks, rods and other gear, is equivalent to 8.9 tonnes, of which 1.2 tonnes are lost at sea annually. Leakage from the fisheries sector occurs in two main ways. Plastic leaked through abandoned, lost, discarded fishing gear (ALDFG). The two most common fishing methods within Vanuatu’s EEZ are longlining and purse seining (WCPFC, 2020). Fishing line is also commonly used by subsistence and artisanal fishermen. Both fishing line and nets are made of polyamide or nylon. Other common objects used in fishing are buoys or floats, which can be made of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), compression moulded polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or rigid foamed polystyrene (PS) (NOAA, 2020). Richardson et al. (2019) estimated global losses of fishing gear to be 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines every year. According to a review of fisheries observer data (2003–2015) from the western and central Pacific on board purse-seine and longline vessels, more than 10,000 pollution incidents occurred within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of 25 Paciﬁc countries and territories and in international waters (Richardson et al., 2017). Of all dumping incidences by purse seiners, 60% was dumping of plastic waste. Vanuatu longline fisheries had only 56 reported pollution incidents in this period, but due to insufficient observer coverage, this is most likely a considerable underestimate of what truly occurs at sea. Apart from this study, there has been minimal investigation of the types, quantities and fate of plastic waste generated by the fisheries sector in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. ALDFG presents one of the most detrimental marine pollution hazards for marine organisms (Figure 25), and much more attention should be given to this issue (Richardson et al., 2019). Consumption-based plastic materials other than fishing gear. Domestic fishing activities in Vanuatu are same-day, overnight or multiple-day fishing operations. Local artisanal fishermen usually stay out only one day, while larger domestic vessels normally fish for five days, and international vessels up to 14 (longliners) and 28 (purse seiners) days. Plastic items taken on board (other than fishing gear) are related to food and drink consumption. This includes food packaging, such as bags with rice, pasta, sugar, drink powder mix, salt and other seasonings, and plastic bottles containing water, soft drinks and juice. More of these plastic items are taken for multi-day operations. Other materials containing plastic include buckets, life jackets, flares, sounding equipment, raincoats and emergency kits. I’m a fisherman from Vanuatu, but these days I caught more plastics than fish when fishing. – John Managawi, a Ni-Vanuatu fisherman (MACBIO, 2019). Institutional framework. Vanuatu is currently a member of the Western & Central Fisheries Commission (WCPFC), Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), South Pacific Regional Management Organisation (SPRFMO) and has ratified the North Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC, 2020). These memberships have enabled Vanuatu’s fisheries to harvest the waters of the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMO) for tuna and other highly migratory fish species. The Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry, Fisheries and Biosecurity (MALFFB) is the sole agency responsible for the control (regulation), development and management of fisheries resources within Vanuatu. The Fisheries Department administers the Fisheries Act (2014) and in 2016, it developed the Vanuatu National Fisheries Sector Policy 2016–2031. Another government document, Vanuatu’s National Ocean Policy (2016), outlines the impact of all sources of pollution, including land-based, solid waste, shipwrecks and shipping pollution, on the marine environment and is complemented by the Vanuatu National Roadmap for Coastal Fisheries: 2019–2030. The Department of Environmental Protection and Conservation (DEPC) administers the following legislation relevant to waste management in the fisheries sector in Vanuatu: •	Environmental Protection and Conservation Act, 2011. •	Environmental Protection Regulations (2011) and a 2012 Amendment. •	Ports Act, 1980. •	Waste Management Act, 2014 . •	Pollution (Control) Act, 2013. In late January 2020, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and External Trade released a draft Vanuatu National Plastics Strategy (2020–2030) for comment. One of the tasks included in the draft relates to fisheries and marine pollution: “Reduce the use of single-use plastics by cruise liners and fishing vessels in Vanuatu waters through agreements for plastic free tourism and enhanced fisheries observer programs”. Waste service provision. In 2018, the Commonwealth Marine Litter Programme (CLiP) initiated a review of the adequacy of waste reception facilities at targeted international and domestic ports in Vanuatu. The aim of the review was to collect information on ship-generated waste, port reception facilities and waste reception handling plans, and to develop recommendations to reduce the leakage of ship-based sources of waste into the environment (APWC, 2019). The review concluded that the demand for waste reception facilities for international shipping at the port of Port Vila was moderate, with more than 200 international vessels making port calls in 2018 (no port calls by either ‘fishing vessels’ or ‘longliners’ were reported). APWC noted that a lack of infrastructure and services to adequately manage wastes generated on land, notwithstanding further wastes from shipping, meant utilisation of the facilities available was limited. Waste disposal practices. Little infrastructure and few facilities are available for fisher folk to dispose of waste once they arrive at port. APWC auditors were not able to find any formal method of waste collection for fishing vessels upon their return to port. APWC 2020 audit — Fisheries methodology. The size and type of fishing vessels operating in a country’s EEZ are different depending on the country. APWC targeted two types of leakage information for this sector: . leakage due to the consumer activities undertaken by fishers while on a fishing trip; leakage due to ALDFG. No sampling was undertaken from international fishing vessels due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Nine domestic fishing boat samples were collected and 12 interviews were conducted (Figure 26) to determine the consumption-based waste disposal rate for the domestic fishing fleet. Audit results – Fisheries waste disposal and leakage . Consumption-based waste disposal and leakage. It was estimated the fisheries sector disposed of around 233 tonnes of solid waste annually, of which 66 tonnes are various plastics, making them the most prevalent (28.4%) type of fisheries waste. The second most dominant category are organics (23%) and metals (20%) (Figure 27). Interestingly, a considerable amount of paper, cardboard and cartons is also being disposed of by this sector (18%). Plastic waste disposal. The amount of plastic waste generated by the fisheries sector is 66 tonnes per year. Of this, the most common polymers are PET (36%), PS (21%), followed closely by PP (20%) (Figure 28). Table 20 – Top 10 plastic items – shows that most waste generated by the fisheries sector is not related to fishing activities but to food and beverage consumption. Although not directly linked to marine activities per se (fishing, sailing, petrochemical exploration), when these items are dumped at sea, they should be classified as ocean-based pollution. However, when consumption-related items are recovered during beach and seafloor assessments, they are routinely associated with land activities. This is a good example of how plastic pollution assessments could potentially underestimate the proportion of ocean-based plastic pollution.          . Plastic waste leakage. Plastic waste leakage in the fisheries sector was calculated in two ways:  . Plastic waste leakage based on field data collected as per the audit methodology. This is waste generated by fisher folk when they are undertaking fishing-related activities, from personal use. Plastic waste leakage desktop study, where leakage calculations are based on assumptions derived from a desktop study literature review (peer reviewed studies from 1978–2021) by Richardson et al. (2019). These estimations are not linked to physical in-country auditing. Plastic leakage from consumer activities. If fishing vessels leak plastics at the same rates found in other sectors of the Vanuatu economy, the average annual leakage in 2019 is given in Table 21. Plastic leakage in the form of fishing gear (ALDFG). For the purpose of ascertaining leakage rates of fishing gear from the fisheries sector APWC calculated the following estimates of leakage rates adopted from Richardson, K. et al. (2019) whereby average net loss is 5.7%, average trap loss is 8.6% and average line loss is 29%. To ascertain the amount of fishing gear that has the potential to be leaked, the types of fishing activities, number of vessels and season length were aggregated. It was assumed that per-vessel usage was identical for other countries studied. These estimates are corroborated by Richardson, K. et al. (2018), whose interview data suggests that nets are replaced around once per year. In addition, the following assumptions were made: each fishing vessel used on average 5.8 lines, 1.1 nets and 0.9 traps and pots; leakage rates are adopted from Richardson, K. et al. (2019) as above; there are gaps in relation to recording fisheries activities across a number of countries, so it is imperative to note that the data set is incomplete and inconsistencies across each country are common. To determine the potential leakage rate of fishing gear per country by polymer type, a number of assumptions were made such as: . All fishing lines weighed 5 kilograms, all nets 60 kilograms and all traps 20 kilograms, and the material composition breakdown of each type of fishing gear is outlined in the table below. The material composition and weight of each gear type was applied to the potential leakage rates of fishing gear as per Table 22 to ascertain the potential leakage rates per country of interest based on the polymer composition in the table above. The calculations show that in both the Pacific and Caribbean regions overall, nylon material (Other-7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type and gear type is shown in the table below. Plastic flow analysis. Marine plastic pollution  . Asari et al. (2019) estimated that PICs contribute 1.3% to 2.7% of the global mismanaged plastic waste, ranging between 156,000 and 327,000 tonnes per year, depending on the scenario. The authors proposed the potential reasons for leakage to be relatively low waste-collection rates in rural areas and high generation rates of plastic waste. In a recent study assessing the quantities of marine plastics in Vanuatu, almost 10 items were found per metre of beach length on Efate, or 1.2 items per square metre on average (Binetti et al., 2020). The most prevalent type of plastic debris encountered was plastic fragments smaller than 2.5 centimetres (12.1% of all marine debris), plastic fragments between 2.5 and 5 cm (8.3%) and polystyrene fragments (7.2%). In a similar study, in the sediments of Efate beaches, the authors found as many as 33,300 microplastics particles per kilogram of dry sediment (Bakir et al., 2020). In Vanuatu surface waters, the average concentration of plastic particles was 51,144 items per square kilometre, or 0.28 items per cubic metre. Crabs, reef fish and tuna were also examined for the presence of microplastics in their gastrointestinal tracts. Out of 14 crabs examined, 57% contained at least one microplastic. A somewhat lower incidence of plastic ingestion was found in reef fish (35% of 20 individuals contained microplastics). Finally, the greatest frequency of plastic ingestion was found in yellowfin tuna, where five out of six fish examined contained as much as 26 plastic particles. Plastic waste generation and disposal in Vanuatu. General and plastic waste generation and disposal is seemingly low in Vanuatu, particularly in the household and commercial sectors (Figure 29 and Figure 30), which could lead to the conclusion that these sectors are not major sources of plastic leakage in the Pacific. However, this is unlikely, considering the inadequate waste management services in Vanuatu. Waste services are absent in most rural and remote areas, and recycling of plastics is almost non-existent. This means that although the disposal intensity is small, lack of collection services means that a large percentage of the waste generated is leaked. In addition, part of the reason why disposal intensity is small could be because a percentage of waste is not being captured through the collection systems. The overall plastic waste disposal rate, across all sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries – has been estimated at around 2,026.5 tonnes per year. The household sector disposed of the most plastic waste annually, generating almost 1,000 tonnes per year and 5,543 cubic metres of plastic waste annually (Figure 30). The commercial sector also contributes considerably to the plastic waste stream, at approximately 700 tonnes per year and 3,979 cubic metres of plastic waste annually. Overall, it is estimated that 58.8% (95% credible interval: 19–82%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from the landfill. The high leakage figure in Vanuatu arises primarily because around half of the population of Vanuatu (approximately 140,000 residents) reside on islands with no waste collection service. Plastic leakage per polymer type. Material flow analysis of the three sectors shows that more than half of the potentially generated plastic waste leaks into the environment (58%) (Figure 31). Urgent measures are required to address this problem. Of the different polymer types (Figure 32), most plastic leakage belongs to the Other (7) group, which contains materials that are a combination of multiple polymers often known as composite materials, with as much as 77% of these plastics being released into the environment. This also supports the fact that Other (7) category is not highly recyclable and is most likely not being stockpiled for future recycling. Other commonly leaked materials include, surprisingly, HDPE (68%) and PP (65%), as these are highly recyclable materials. This may be explained by the fact that no recycling occurs in Vanuatu. Policy analysis. Impact of bans – Reduce. The importance of overall waste-generation reduction, the minimisation of waste going to landfill by effective material recovery, and proper landfilling techniques for managing residual waste was emphasised at the first National Solid Waste  Planning Workshop held by DEPC and JICA in Port Vila on 28 February 2020 within their J-PRISM II initiative. Since 2018, Vanuatu also banned single-use plastic bags, straws and Styrofoam food containers. A plan to ban disposable nappies is under consideration but was not implemented at the time of the audit. The 2020 APWC audit found a 90% reduction in lightweight single-use plastic bag usage compared with an audit conducted in 2018 by APWC (Table 29). However, a 2018 JICA audit found that 2% of household waste was single-use shopping bags, straws or polystyrene food containers, while our current audit finds that this is only a fraction of all waste at 0.1%, which is consistent with a 90% reduction in usage across all banned plastics. Potential impact of future bans and levies . Detailed information on the capacity of Bouffa Landfill is not readily available, although we do know it covers 48 hectares. Suppose that each cell of the landfill can be filled to a depth of 10 metres and the entire 48-hectare footprint can be filled in this manner. These assumptions yield a landfill volume of 4,800,000 cubic metres. Assuming Port Vila waste disposal grows by 2% each year on average and is compacted to 600 kilograms per cubic metre, then 530,000 cubic metres will be occupied already. With no change to waste management practices, 1,000,000 cubic metres will be occupied by the year 2036. Landfill utilisation could be reduced by 55% if glass bottles, plastic bottles, nappies, e-waste and organics were recovered from the waste stream. Leakage averted. APWC sorting data indicates that PET beverage bottles account for 80% of PET waste while PET beauty and personal care bottles and cooking oil bottles together account for an additional 16% of PET waste. HDPE bottles, including drink bottles, cleaning products and beauty products, accounted for 18% of HDPE waste. Assuming a CDL achieves 80% recovery of the containers destined for leakage, the following tables estimate the leakage of PET and HDPE averted by introducing two different types of CDL scheme. Conclusion. There are several key issues involved with generation and disposal of solid waste in Vanuatu, including plastic waste. The provision of waste services should be prioritised, including the improvement of existing services in more populated areas and provision of services in rural, remote and less populated areas. Remote communities have access to plastic goods, in particular food packaging, but there is no formalised disposal available. For this reason, dumping, burying and burning remain the most common disposal practices . Reduction of plastic waste generation is a key priority, as well as recycling the existing waste. The major sources  for plastic leakage identified in Vanuatu include: Lack of disposal service provision. Street littering. Inefficient public rubbish bin maintenance. Open dumping (ocean, river and on land). Animal scattering of plastics. Windborne distribution of plastics from the landfill into the surrounding environment. Toilet flushing (pads, tampons, ear buds, cigarette butts, etc.). Backyard burial and burning (semi-controlled disposal). Plastic leakage from construction sites. Agricultural leakage. Leakage from numerous fisheries and other marine activities.Overall, APWC recommends a systemic change through the creation of a waste management authority, with responsibility for undertaking all waste management tasks for all sectors. Currently, the roles of waste management personnel are ill defined and there are insufficient staffing levels and resourcing to adequately carry out the requisite work. Tourism is the dominant industry in Vanuatu and the plastic waste generated by the sector is extensive (Figure 29). Improper disposal of plastic waste degrades the environment and has long-term effects on visitor perceptions. This particularly applies to cruise ships, as it is well established that they produce large amounts of waste. An average cruise ship with a capacity of 2,000 passengers generates about six tonnes of waste per day (3 kg/person/day of waste, APWC, 2019). International ports in Vanuatu do not accept waste (except dry waste in some instances) from international vessels. This affords cruise ships an excuse to dump waste at sea, as has happened in the past (the Princess cruise line was detected dumping waste overboard and consequently fined more than USD 40 million) (NPR, 2021). Estimating the waste generated, disposed of or dumped in the fisheries sector also presents challenges, as lack of access to records makes it difficult to quantify the extent of the problem. Plastic leakage from fishing vessels occurs regularly, both intentionally and unintentionally. According to fisheries observer data obtained from 2003 to 2015, of all materials dumped overboard, most were plastics (Richardson et al., 2017). The majority of equipment on fishing boats (fishing or maritime) is manufactured using synthetic polymers. Apart from fishing gear, most other items are made from various composite plastics. Food and beverages taken on fishing trips are often packaged in single-use plastics. Items are commonly thrown overboard, often through lack of awareness and lack of enforcement by authorities. Fishing gear can be lost and abandoned in rough sea conditions and is often discarded overboard if no longer of use. APWC recommends strict monitoring of the fisheries industry and potential plastic leakage from these activities. Fisheries observers, video surveillance on board, monitoring of plastics before and after trips, and fishing gear tagging are available measures that should be implemented to reduce the impact of plastic leakage from the fisheries sector.
