Overall, the economies of scale in Grenada do not allow for a major impetus toward recycling because the volume of available material is limited. There is a significant gap in capturing and successfully managing recyclable material such plastic PET, HDPE containers and organics. Recycling potential exists, with two active metal aggregators on Grenada and one plastic recycler in the island of Carriacou. The latter collects plastic bottles and containers, shreds them and uses the material to produce plant pots and building bricks.  Grenada has implemented legislation in an effort to transition away from single-use plastic materials. The audit findings suggest that compliance rates show the bans are being successfully implemented. In order to support the use of plastic alternatives, the government of Grenada is working towards a zero or reduced import duty for biodegradable and compostable food-service containers.  A levy of XCD 0.25 is imposed on glass and plastic beverage containers imported into Grenada, with the funds forwarded to GSWMA. However, the Act’s definition of plastic imports does not include preform plastic bottles. Households dispose of 0.58 kilogram of waste per resident per day of which 10.7% is plastic. Commercial businesses dispose of 0.91 kilogram per employee per day of which 4.2% is plastic. Nappies represented 8% of household plastic waste. Alternatives to disposable nappies should be investigated.  Overall, the tourism sector contributes to 14% of all plastic waste generated in Grenada. Aircraft are currently exempt from Grenada’s bans. The total polystyrene plastics found were 1.74 tonnes per year or 18% of all airline plastics. The overall plastic disposal rate in Grenada for the period 2019–2020 was 3,547 tonnes per year or 0.06 kilogram per resident per day. Figure 2 outlines the disposal rate in tonnes and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector. Overall, it was estimated that 27% (95% credible interval: 16%–40%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Grenada; this equates to 1,294 tonnes per year. Table 1:	Overall leakage based on plastic imported, recycled, disposed of and leaked in Grenada Include plastic preforms in the import levy on beverage containers, as most plastic containers are imported as preforms.  Implement awareness campaigns on plastic leakage across all sectors.  Caribbean islands are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of plastic leakage into marine and land-based ecosystems. Marine pollution is now ubiquitous in SIDS, posing a serious threat to the pristine ecosystems highly valued for tourism, fisheries and other valuable commodities, and the health and well-being of Caribbean island communities. Addressing marine pollution is an ecological, economic and social priority, particularly in a region where the health of the ocean is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the lives of the indigenous inhabitants of this region. Although SIDS are adversely affected by plastic pollution originating from outside their regions, considerable amounts of plastic waste is being produced on the islands as well. The average waste disposal of SIDS inhabitants is 2.30 kilograms per person per day, which is 48% higher than the world average of 1.55 kilograms. Plastic represents about 8% of household and commercial solid waste (UNEP, 2019). In 2019, with support from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Didier and Martine Primat Foundation, IUCN launched the Plastic Waste Free Islands (PWFI) initiative to help close the global plastic waste pollution gap. As part of its Close the Plastic Tap Programme, PWFI is a three-year initiative working in three regions: the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Pacific The initiative’s overarching goal is to drive the circular economy agenda forward and reduce plastic waste generation and leakage from islands. Plastics leak into the ocean through a number of channels, including direct dumping of mismanaged or uncollected waste or land dumping that eventually makes its way to the marine environment (61% of total microplastic leakage). Waste collected formally and disposed of at landfill sites is also mismanaged, entering via land, air or illegally dumped into water (39% of total microplastic leakage) (Pew Charitable Trust and SystemsIQ, 2020). Studies of the concentration levels of plastics in the Caribbean Sea have measured between 20 and 200,000 items per square kilometre (Diez et al., 2019). Flexible packaging (such as films, wraps and bags) and multilayer materials (such as sachets, nappies and beverage cartons) represent a disproportionate share of leakage from land-based sources, at 46% and 26% respectively (Diez et al., 2019). In relation to ocean-based sources of plastic pollution, a global meta-analysis study investigated fishing gear losses for different major gear types, estimating that 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines are lost worldwide each year (Richardson, Hardesty and Wilcox, 2019). A 2016 report predicted that by 2025 for every three tonnes of fish there will be one tonne of plastic waste in the ocean; therefore, by 2050, there will be more plastic than fish in the ocean (World Economic Forum et al., 2016). Grenada is heavily dependent on limited natural resources to support three of their primary sectors: tourism, agriculture and fishing. There were significantly more imports (USD 200 million) compared to exports (USD 36.5 million) in 2018 (OEC, 2020). More than 70% of food consumed in Grenada is imported, and is comprised of mostly chicken, cereals and dairy products (Government of Grenada, 2015). These products are typically packaged in flexible plastics.  Since 1995, Grenada has introduced measures to manage solid waste, including the establishment of a solid waste agency. In 2018, it became the eighth Caribbean country to introduce plastic bans. Although Grenada’s legislation makes provision for fines for illegal dumping, currently no penalties are in place nor administered.  In 2013 there was extensive investigation into the viability of a container deposit scheme (CDS) for beverage containers (GIZ, 2015). This study gave detailed analysis of how to structure, operate and legally frame a CDS for plastic and glass beverage containers, including financial sustainability, estimated income, capital, shipping costs, salaries, as well as the environmental and economic impacts. None of the recommendations from the study have been implemented.  The Environmental Levy Act 2015 has provisions for financial incentives to encourage plastic re-export (see details below). As per customs data provided to APWC, no plastic exports were reported. Therefore, the provisions in the Act should be reviewed for effectiveness.  The Non-Biodegradable Waste Control Act introduced a phased approach to banning polystyrene (Styrofoam), single-use plastic bags and plastic takeaway items from food premises, including restaurants, takeaway outlets, grocery stores, supermarkets, mobile food outlets and cafeterias. Single-use plastic shopping bags with handles were banned from importation and local manufacturing from February 2019, followed by a 10-month interval to deplete stocks, with the full ban on the sale shopping bags from February. Single-use plastic utensils (spoons, forks, cups and plates) were banned from importation and local manufacturing in March 2020, followed by a six-month interval to deplete stocks until bulk sale or wholesale was banned, with the full ban on the sale of plastic utensils from food premises scheduled for March 2021. Included in the ban are utensils made of all plastic polymers such as PS and PP; plastic single-use bags with handles including LDPE, HDPE; and polystyrene takeaway containers.  The Act makes provision for hefty fines of up to XCD 25,000 that can be imposed on businesses and individuals who import or manufacture banned plastic items, and XCD 4,500 for those who sell banned items. No penalties have been reported since the commencement of the ban (Trade Division, 2020).  Overall, slightly fewer single-use plastic bags and slightly more expanded polystyrene (EPS) products were found in Grenada’s waste when compared with other countries with bans in place, as shown on Table 2. Environmental Protection Levy Act (2007) (amended Act 6 of 2015) – a levy on goods and services (including imported glass and plastic bottles and a waste service fee) to support the financial operations of the GSWMA. The GSWMA is responsible for the management of solid waste in Grenada, while overall regulatory and enforcement functions are the responsibility of the Ministry of Health (MoH). Interestingly, the national environment policy and the plastic bag ban administration sits within the Ministry of Climate Resilience, the Environment, Forestry, Fisheries and Disaster Management.  Similarly, the legislation and enforcement function sits within MoH, whereas education sits within the Ministry of Climate. This often leads to lack of clarity in responsibility, frustration within the bureaucracy and inefficient compliance. Table 3 outlines the roles and responsibilities of waste management in Grenada. A detailed breakdown of each sector can be found in the following sections: household and commercial — Waste service provision, tourism sector — Waste service provision, and fisheries sector — Waste service provision. A levy of XCD 0.25 is imposed on glass and plastic beverage containers imported into Grenada, with the funds forwarded to GSWMA. However, the Act’s definition of plastic imports does not include preform plastic bottles, and as a consequence, this bottle has become the preferred product of major water and beverage companies.  Only the original importer is authorised to receive a refund subsequent to the re-export and/or appropriate disposal of the plastic bottles. There is no mechanism for refund to any non-importer that successfully disposes of or re-exports bottles. This therefore does not support new companies interested in collecting and re-exporting plastic waste. Most plastic containers are imported as preforms. Preforms are not covered under the environmental tax levy, and so there is no incentive to dispose of or re-export (see section Plastic producers). Six months is an inadequate period of time for a company to sell, consume, collect and export a plastic product (as well as provide evidence), therefore making it unrealistic to take advantage of the financial incentive. The Environmental Levy Act has provision for a tipping fee (XCD 75 per tonne) to be charged for waste delivered by non-householders. This fee is currently not charged because it may encourage illegal dumping by private waste haulers. Tipping fees are specified for special waste such as private solid waste (XCD 120.75 per tonne); shipping waste (XCD 212.75 per tonne); shredding of rigid plastics such as drink crates (XCD 138.00 per tonne); metal baling (XCD 7.00 per bale); and an on-site wood chipping service (XCD 115 per hour). When charged, these special tipping fees are passed to the overall GSWMA budget and are referred to as ‘other’ (see Table 4). This category also includes: (1) sale of metal bales; (2) charges for special waste disposal such as incineration of confidential documents, burial or entombment of chemicals or special waste; and (3) special commercial waste collection services. Plastic imports Grenada imported plastic and rubber products/articles from seven countries (the top countries being United States, Trinidad and Tobago, China and France) amounting to USD 12.9 million during 2009. Exports for 2008 were to 10 countries (topped by the Netherlands, UK, United States, Trinidad and Tobago) and amounted to USD 167,000 (World Bank, 2020).  Plastic bottles are either imported into Grenada as bottles or preforms. Preform bottles, which are blown and filled by a number of companies in Grenada make around 75% of the overall number of plastic bottles imported and have become the preferred product. A list of plastic bottle producers can be found in Appendix C: Project methodology—producers. Three recyclers collect recyclable materials such as metal, used oils, glass, plastics and batteries, as shown in Appendix C. No to Single Use Plastic Association (NTSUPA) is the only recycler in Grenada collecting plastic waste for local reuse through provision of bins and beach clean-ups (Table 5 and Table 7). The public is encouraged to dispose of their plastics in seven large plastic bags and a cage at Dumfries Landfill (Figure 7), in addition to bins set up in community areas.  Although NTSUPA accepts all plastics, they are currently only working with plastic bottles and stockpiling soft plastics for future projects. The plastic collected is granulated, melted and then pressed into blocks or made into plant pots for local use (Figure 8).  Paddy’s Enterprises, a NTSUPA partner, is responsible for the construction of the blocks and pots once the plastic is granulated. The pots are sold for XCD 40 and the blocks at the same price as regular concrete blocks. By the end of 2020, NTSUPA had granulated 200 kilograms and processed it into 5,000 blocks. To keep the pricing of the blocks competitive, the organisation is currently looking for funding as well as GSWMA’s support for a bigger granulator, with an aim to process all plastic waste produced in Carriacou Island. If successful, NTSUPA hopes to expand their operations to Grenada Island.  Table 5:	Plastic recyclers in Grenada There is no systematic source separation of plastic or glass recyclables. Some metal recycling takes place by waste pickers and the materials are stockpiled and exported for overseas recycling when international prices are high (GSWMA, 2020). Green waste is chipped and sold as mulch. The GSWMA has a tyre shredder and is the only entity known to be engaged in any tyre processing in Grenada. The shredded tyres are used to create roadways on the landfill, by loosely depositing it on the surface of excavated roadways at the facility to assist truck access to the tipping locations.   There is no fencing or gate to control entry to the site, which results in indiscriminate dumping of self-hauled waste, leakage into surrounding areas and scavenging by animals and livestock (Figure 16). Herds of cows, goats, sheep, donkeys and dogs were seen at the landfill rummaging through the garbage for food scraps. The APWC team observed these animals even consuming bags of plastic and other unhealthy materials.  In 2020, a cleanup operation around Dumfries removed a huge quantity of light litter from the side of the public access road and sides of the drain near Dumfries Well, including plastic bags, fabric, cans, scrap metal, beverage containers and bagged waste items (GSWMA, 2020). There is a small number of current and previous plastics projects operating in Grenada. APWC recommends that any projects designed to improve future outcomes of these regulations should work closely with existing plastics projects (Table 7). Table 7:	Current and previous plastic projects In terms of the viability of a WtE facility, calculations based on the APWC 2020 audit indicate that Grenada has 32,700 tonnes of waste available for a facility per year. However, this figure includes all recyclable materials including plastics, which according to the waste hierarchy should be recycled and not incinerated through WtE processes. Therefore, 29,000 tonnes of feedstock remains if plastics are not included in the calculations. Furthermore, if all recyclables are removed, there would be only 7,286 tonnes of non-recyclable material available (for details of this calculation, see Appendix B: National solid waste management). By comparison, Bermuda’s WtE facility processes 52,000 tonnes per year; Martinique processes 112,000 tonnes per year, Jamaica 219 tonnes per year and Mauritius 100,000 tonnes per year (Rodríguez, 2011). Household and commercial sector – plastic quantification results Some households store waste in either plastic buckets, self-provided 200-litre plastic bins, or place uncontained waste directly on the ground (Figure 18). Communal bins (Figure 19) were originally provided in areas not easily accessed by collection trucks and only 16% of Grenada received waste coverage. Although kerbside collection is now provided to 56% to 98% of households due to improved road access, communal bins remain in highly populated areas, in housing scheme areas and along some of the main roads. Communal bins are problematic when they are filled to overflowing. Residents prefer to dispose of their waste in the communal bins because they either forget to put their waste out on collection day, they produced more than their bins’ capacity or because the contractor did not comply with collection times or day. In February 2021, the GSWMA increased waste hauler capacity to make the service more reliable by increasing the number of collection areas and contractors by 30% (number of contractors increased from six to nine).  There is no systematic recycling or aggregation of recyclable materials in Grenada, either by government or private recyclers. The majority of plastics, glass, metals, nappies and organics are disposed of in general mixed waste at the landfill. Other waste services are available from the GSWMA for an additional cost, including services for private solid waste, shipping waste, shredding of rigid plastics such as drink crates, metal baling and an on-site wood-chipping (GSWMA, 2012). Table 12 below presents a summary of municipal waste services in Grenada.  In the 2020 stakeholder interviews, APWC consultants found that all (100%) of household plastic waste collected is taken to the landfill, 19% of organic material is composted or fed to animals, 3% is dumped on land and 1.5% is burned. General waste is mostly (97%) disposed of to be collected, and 1.5% is buried. Bulky waste is collected, 97% through normal collection and 3% through special collection (Figure 22).  Commercial premises disposed of 88% of their plastic waste, 79% of their organic waste and 91% of their general waste in the collection. Three per cent (3%) take their plastic waste to be recycled, 3% burn their plastic waste and 6% said their plastic waste is disposed of through other means (not disclosed). Organic waste is composted or fed to animals (6%), collected through a special collection (6%) or burned (3%). (Figure 22).  In 2020, the household and commercial sector disposed of 44,219 tonnes of waste. Of this, 7.7% (or 3,402 T/y) was plastic waste, contributing 95.9% of the overall plastic disposal for Grenada. As shown in Figure 28 below, organic waste (including biodegradable waste) accounted for the largest amount of waste generated, at 34.1% (or 15,100 T/y) of the total amount of waste, which is mostly food and green waste. Paper and cardboard can potentially be composted together with organics, adding another 11.8% ( or 5,231 T/y) per annum, as well as wood 10.3% (or 4,540 T/y). Construction waste, including cement, tiles, clean fill, plasterboard and rocks accounted for 11.6% (or 5,142 T/y) for the year. Glass accounted for 8.1% (or 3,601 T/y) of the waste generated and metals (including aluminium) followed, accounting for 7.8% (or 3,430 T/y) of total waste generated.  Audit analysis shows that the overall waste disposal rate for households in Grenada is 22,782 tonnes/year or 0.56 kilogram per resident per day and 21,438 tonnes/year or 0.91 kilogram per employee per day. Figure 29 below shows that households contribute twice as much plastic waste as commercial premises, with plastic representing 10.3% (or 2,353 T/y) of household waste and 4.9% (or 1,050 T/y) of commercial waste. Household disposal accounted for 66.3% (or 2,353 T/y) of all plastic waste disposed of in Grenada. Plastics represented 10.3% of all household waste disposal and the most common plastic polymers were PET (1) at 28.3%, HDPE (2) at 24.3%, followed by plastic ‘Other’ (7) and LDPE (4) that accounted for 19.3% and 16.6% respectively (Table 12 and Figure 30). Commercial premises disposed of 29.6% (or 1,050 T/y) of all plastic waste disposed of in Grenada. Plastics represented 4.9% of all commercial waste disposal and the most prevalent plastic polymers were PET (1) at 32.9%, HDPE (2) at 23.6%, plastics ‘Other’ (7) at 17.2% and LDPE (4) at 15% (Table 12 and Figure 30). The contribution of each plastic polymer to household and commercial waste is presented in Table 12 and Figure 30 below. The top 10 plastic items disposed of by households and commercial premises were a number of plastic polymers, most of which are classified as single-use plastics, and why they are common in the waste stream (Table 13). The most common household plastic items disposed of are lightweight shopping bags (12.3% of all household plastics), followed by soft plastic packaging (11.2%) and PET drink (10.4%) and water bottles (7.2%). PET cooking oil containers, PP container lids and LDPE glossy shopping bags each represented approximately 4% of all household plastic waste, and HDPE cleaning agents, home care, shampoo and body wash approximately 2% each. Commercial waste was topped by PET bottles containing beverages other than water (21.9%), followed by HDPE food containers (10.6%) and LDPE soft plastic packaging (8.6%). PET beverage bottles were ranked fourth (8.6%), followed by PP container lids (5.2%), wrap foils/cling films (4.6%) and PS single-use plastic cutlery (3%). The last three items were HDPE cleaning agents (2.8%), bubble wrap foils (1.9%) and food semi-rigid containers (1.3%).  Plastic waste leakage  Overall, the household and commercial sector represented 95.9% of all plastic leaked in Grenada. It was  estimated that Grenada overall leaked 1,294 tonnes/year of plastic with a 95% Bayesian credible interval (BCI) of 739–1910 T/y. This amounted to a leakage rate of 27% (95% BCI of 16–40%). Individual polymer leakage rates were highly uncertain and ranged from 14% for PET (95% BCI 0.02–39%) and 61% for PS (95% BCI 0.06–47%). Assuming household and commercial leakage rates were equal to the best estimate of the national average, households accounted for two-thirds of the country overall, and plastic leakage per resident was 7.74 kilograms per year. The most leaked plastic polymer by household was plastic ‘Other’ (26%of leaked household plastic). PS, HDPE, LDPE and PP each represented 14% to 16% of household plastic leakage (Table 14). Under the same assumptions, commercial plastic leakage represented 29% of all plastic leakage and equated to 5.8 kilograms per person per year. Commercial plastic leakage was led by plastic ‘Other’, which represented 24% of commercial plastic leakage, followed by PS (17%). PET, HDPE, PP and LDPE each represented between 14% to 15% of commercial plastic leakage. Table 14: Plastic waste leakage rate (tonnes/year) and leakage intensity (kg/person/day) for households and commercial sector, Grenada Given that a significant amount of PET, HDPE and PP from households and commercial premises are lost to the environment, the implementation of a container-related initiative such as container deposit legislation (CDL) could help reduce plastic leakage. CDL places a value on plastic bottles and containers to encourage the public to collect and return containers for money, helping to prevent continued leakage into the environment. Grenada Breweries has been successful with a container deposit scheme for glass bottles.  Preventing leakage of these items is a first important step, however CDL could also finance processing the plastics for export. Tourism – Plastic quantification results The GTA publicly backed the government’s plan to introduce the plastic ban in 2018 (Travel weekly, 2018). All yacht tourists (100%) reported that general waste generated on board was offloaded at the port. This waste is then delivered to the Perseverance or Dumfries landfills. All 12 interviewees reported that plastic waste is offloaded at the port and taken to landfill. Thirty-three per cent (33 %) of interviewees reported that food waste is offloaded at the port and 67% reported food waste was dropped in the ocean.  APWC undertook interviews to understand the waste disposal behaviour of tourism operators, both for land and sea tourism. Results indicate leakage at source is common in the tourism sector, with 25% of sea-based tourism respondents indicating they dump plastic and general waste on land.  During 2019 to 2020, the tourism sector generated 2,832 tonnes of waste. Of this, 106 tonnes per year were plastic waste, contributing 3% of the overall generation of plastics for Grenada. Unsurprisingly, organic waste accounted for the largest amount of waste generated, at 46% (or 1,278 T/y) of the total waste generated by the sector (as shown in Figure 39). Metals, including aluminium, accounted for 28.7% (840 T/y) and paper and cardboard (including LPB) accounted for 6.9% (228 T/y). Glass contributed 6.2% (or 176 T/y) and construction waste contributed 6.1% (or 173 T/y) towards the total disposal rate. Grenada’s overall rate of waste generation for land-based tourism in 2020 was 1.18 kilograms per tourist per day, more than double of that of the airline tourism which produces 0.45 kilogram per arrival per day. Despite Grenada receiving 342,000 cruise tourists each year, waste from cruise ships is not offloaded. The waste contributions from yachts is equivalent to 9.88 kilograms per arrival. All waste is currently landfilled and no materials are separated or recycled (with the exception of one marina and Carriacou’s plastic collection).  Within the tourism sector, land-based accommodation was responsible for the largest share of waste disposed of (89%), followed by yachts at 8.6% and airlines at 2.6% (Table 21 and Figure 40). Plastic waste disposed of in the tourism sector originated primarily from land-based tourism (53%) sources, followed by yachts (38%) and airline waste (9.2%). Table 21: Sectoral contribution to waste and plastic disposal rates (tonnes/year) Most waste categories disposed of by the tourism sector were dominated by land-based tourism waste (Figure 41). For example, 100% of construction and textile waste was disposed of from land-based tourism, as well as most hygiene products?? (94%), metals (96%), paper and cardboard (77%), organics (91%) and glass (66%). Yacht waste represented 31% of glass, 22% of organics, 17% of paper and cardboard, 4% of metals and 6% of hygiene. Airline waste represented 100% of ‘Other’ waste, 3% of organic, 9% of plastic waste, 6% of paper and cardboard, and 3% of glass (Figure 41).  The overall disposal of plastic waste by the tourism sector in Grenada equals 106 tonnes per year.  In addition to the generation of general and plastic waste, tourists also contribute indirectly to the generation of sewage, bulky and construction waste through the operation of tourism-related businesses, although these waste streams typically contain much less plastic than household and commercial solid waste. Tourists overall spent 2.1 million nights in Grenada during 2018, compared with roughly 41 million person-nights spent by residents. Therefore, it could be estimated that tourists contribute indirectly to the generation of 5% of sewage, bulky and construction waste. This indirect waste generation was not included in the ‘tourism waste’ category. Overnight land tourists in Grenada are responsible for the largest share of waste disposed of overall, including the largest share of plastics. As shown in Figure 42 and Table 23, land-based tourism plastic waste was dominated by plastic ‘Other’ (30.4%), LDPE (25.9%) and PET (22.7%).  Airline plastic waste was composed of approximately one-third plastic ‘Other’ (37.3%), one-third LDPE (30.4%), with polystyrene (PS) contributing another 17.8% and PET 14.3%.  Airline waste disposal was 73 tonnes per year, accounting for the smallest share of waste in comparison to other tourism activities. Aircraft are currently exempt from Grenada’s bans. The total of PS plastics found were 1.74 tonnes per year or 18% of all airline plastics.  Yacht waste disposal was dominated by PET (50%) and plastic ‘Other’ at 30.8%. Yachts in Grenada offloaded 9.8 kilograms per arrival compared with 16.6 kilograms per arrival for yachts in Saint Lucia. Interestingly, the data indicates that the amount of waste offloaded per boat in Grenada was much less than that reported for  Saint Lucia. Interviews with yacht crew in Grenada indicated an average offloaded waste quantity of 6.78 kilograms per boat, whereas yacht crews in Saint Lucia reported offloading an average of 99 kilograms per boat. This difference appears to be due to yachts in Grenada having fewer passengers and crew on average, in addition to offloading substantially less waste per person. Table 23: Contribution of plastic polymers to the overall plastic disposal for each tourism subsector, Grenada As discussed for household and commercial sector leakage, it is estimated that 16–40% of the plastic consumed in Grenada is ultimately leaked, with a best estimate of 27%. If the tourism sector leaks plastic at the same rates as Grenada overall, it will produce the quantities of leakage shown in Table 24 below. The most leaked plastic polymer type from the tourism sector overall was plastic ‘Other’ (43.9%), followed by LDPE (17.7%), PET (14.4%), PP (8%), PS (8%) and PVC (1%). Sea-based plastic waste leakage Grenada does not accept waste from cruise ships. However, cruise ships in the EEZ have the potential to leak waste. For the purpose of this study, it was estimated that 51% of plastic waste was leaked or incinerated, but rates of anywhere between 0% and 91% could not be excluded. Organic waste disposed of by cruise ships clearly fell short of their waste production – it was estimated 93% of organic waste (91–95%) was leaked or incinerated (note: it is permissible to offload organic waste in the ocean under MARPOL Annex IV). MARPOL regulations state there is a complete ban on dumping of all plastics into the sea, at any distance from land. Other products, such as paper, rugs, glass, metals, bottles, crockery, lining and packaging can be legally discharged at 25 miles (40 km) from shore (IMO, 2019). However, no discharge of any type of waste is permitted in ‘special areas’ or bodies of water deemed to require additional protection, such as the entire Caribbean. In these areas, only food waste can be discharged 12 or more nautical miles (22.2 km) from shore and comminuted or ground food wastes capable of passing through a screen with openings no greater than 25 millimetres may be discharged if the vessel is at least 3 nautical miles (4.8 km) from the nearest land. As such, it is not surprising that there is very high ‘leakage’ in this category.  Fisheries – Plastic Quantification results Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) is likely the main contributor to plastic leakage from the fisheries sector in Grenada. Monofilament is an important component of the dominant fishing gears in Grenada: hand lines and longlines. The latter are many kilometres long and are made primarily of braided nylon line and monofilament. The fishery is dependent on bait captured in pelagic gill nets or beach seines that are primarily monofilament. FADs used offshore are predominantly made from palm fronds, but materials used to bind the fronds include polypropylene, nylon and natural fibre string. The demersal fishery utilises fish traps/pots, bottom gillnets, bottom longlines and hand lines. Bottom longlines and hand lines are primarily monofilament. Fish traps are constructed with plastic-coated wire and connected in strings by polypropylene rope. Trammel nets, constructed with monofilament line and previously used to capture demersal fish and lobsters, have been banned, but it is unclear if and when these rules were implemented (MRAG, 2021). A large majority of domestic fishing vessels in Grenada are engaged in same-day or overnight fishing operations, with operators taking subsistence items such as food, water and drink containers on board. Vessels engaged in multi-day operations are more likely to take plastic items such as food packaging (e.g. bags with rice, pasta, sugar, drink mix, salt and other seasonings), and food, water and drink containers. Other materials containing plastic include buckets, life jackets, flares and sounding equipment. ALDFG is considered the main source of plastic waste in the marine environment, coming from the fisheries and aquaculture sector (FAO, 2016). A Caribbean study reported that the majority of ALDFG was found underwater (60%) and traps were the most common type of gear (41%), followed by various types of nets (25%) (Matthews, 2009). Derelict fishing gear floating on the ocean surface or resting on the ocean floor can continue to trap non-target organisms, a process known as ghost-fishing (Lusher et al., 2017 and NOAA, 2015). Fish landing sites in Grenada generally have no facilities for repairing or disposing of fishing nets for fisherfolk. The only exception was found in Duquesne port. In the north-west corner, APWC consultants observed fisherfolk reusing fishing nets, which were donated or sold to farmers who use them to collect fruit from the trees. Interestingly, fishing line (heavy duty) is being re-used for ‘weed-eaters’ to cut wheat, grass or bush, instead of newly-purchased replacement plastic cord.  The fisherfolk interviewed reported disposing of 100% of their plastics and general waste in the bins provided, while 50% of fisherfolk reported disposing of organic waste at sea as shown in Figure 47. The overall total generation rate per vessel per day is reported to be 0.46 kilogram per boat per day and 0.12 kilogram of plastics per vessel per day. The 2020 audit found that the fisheries sector waste stream was predominately composed of 31% glass, followed by plastics (25%), organics including biodegradable material (16.6%), paper and cardboard including LPB (12.7%) and e-waste (7.8%) (Figure 52).  Plastic disposal in the fisheries sector For the period 2019–2020, the Grenada fisheries sector disposed of 38.24 tonnes per year of plastic waste or 1.08% of all plastic waste disposed of in Grenada. The type of plastic polymer was predominately Plastic Other (44.8%), HDPE (26.3%) and PET (19.4%) (Figure 53). Fisheries top 10 plastic items The top 10 plastic items shown in Table 33 below account for almost half of all plastic items found in fisheries waste in Grenada. The top 10 plastic items in fisheries are led by HDPE containers of cleaning agent products (19.6%), followed by PET materials such as drink bottles (12.8%), water bottles (3%), cleaning agent products (1.8%), food semi-rigid containers (1.5%), container lids (2.4%) and plastic rope (2.3%). It is assumed that a large percentage of the HDPE containers (cleaning agent products) are repurposed for buoys, buckets and so forth.  Plastic disposal of fisheries was divided between waste generated by fisherfolk while they are undertaking fishing-related activities and loss of gear, i.e ALDFG. As outlined in the household and commercial leakage section, it is estimated that 16-40% of Grenada’s consumed plastics is leaked with a best estimate of 17%. If fishing vessels leak at the same rates as other sectors of the Grenada economy, the average annual leakage as of 2019 is given in Table 34. Table 34: Fisheries annual leakage rate and intensity per plastic polymer type, Grenada The most leaked plastic item from fisheries vessels in Grenada was Plastic Other (8.6 T/y), which is leaked at a rate of at least three times that of the next most commonly leaked plastic, HDPE. Given that PET is varied and is used in a wide variety of products, it would be not be desirable to ban, and therefore education to prevent the initial disposal into the sea is an important tool to prevent future plastic leakage from the fisheries sector. In addition to this, as with the other sectors, reducing the quantity of PET and HDPE leaked could be achieved through a limited ban on certain container sizes that are almost certainly destined to become single-use plastics, for example 250-millilitre, or 300-millilitre water bottles. Alternatively, a container deposit scheme would place value on the plastic contained within the items, and would promote collection for recycling.  The material composition and weight of each gear type was applied to the potential leakage rates of fishing gear as per Table 35 to ascertain the potential leakage rates per country of interest based on the polymer composition in Table 36. The calculations assume that in Grenada overall, nylon material (Other 7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type by gear type is shown in Table 37. Each country provided import data linked to Customs HS codes related to plastic material in fishing gear. In 2019, the countries in focus imported approximately 16.73 tonnes of fishing gear containing plastic components. The Grenada fishing fleet comprises approximately 900 vessels, or 0.023% of the world’s 3.7 million-vessel fleet (Rosseau et al., 2019). Hull scrapings from anti-fouling coatings or composite hull materials lost through wear and cleaning are recognised as a source of microplastic pollution in the ocean. Sundt, Schulze and Syversen (2014) estimate that Norwegian recreational vessels emit around 0.5 kilogram of microplastics per annum. As domestic fishing vessels in Grenada may be larger on average than recreational vessels, it can be estimated that they might shed 1 kilogram per vessel per year. Overall, we estimate with considerable uncertainty that the Grenada fishing fleet sheds 900 kilograms of microplastics per year. Plastic disposal in Grenada  The overall plastic disposal rate in Grenada for the period 2019–2020 was 3,547 tonnes per year or 0.058 kilogram per resident per day (Table 41).  Households disposed of 66% of all plastic waste produced in Grenada; commercial premises disposed of 30%; the tourism sector disposed of 3%; and the fisheries sector 1%. Table 41: Total waste and plastic disposal rates for all four sectors, in Grenada The largest disposal of plastics is in households, which account for 66.33% or 2,353 tonnes per year of the total plastic disposal rate, and equates to 0.06 kilogram per resident per day. Commercial premises generate 29.6% or 1,050 tonnes per year, making them the second largest contributor of plastic waste; this equates to 0.045 kilograms per employee per day. The tourism sector contributes 106 tonnes per year (combined land, sea and air tourists) with a plastic disposal intensity of 0.026 kilograms per tourist in accommodation per day, which is  one-tenth of the 1.7 kilograms per tourist arrival (including yachts, airlines and cruise ships). The fisheries sector is the smallest contributor of plastic waste at 38 tonnes per year, equating to a plastic disposal intensity of 0.116 kilograms per vessel per day.  Although the household and commercial sector disposes of the largest quantities of general waste and plastic waste in Grenada, the waste disposal intensity per person for tourist yachts is particularly high, with 1.6 kilograms per arrival – more than 16 times higher than the disposal intensity of residents for household waste. Likewise, the plastic disposal intensity for tourists arriving by yacht is 26 times higher than the plastic disposal intensity of residents for household waste. Yacht plastic waste disposal intensity is also 40 times higher than for commercial employees per day.  With regards to tourists staying in land accommodation, waste disposal intensity is double that of residents in households, although their plastic waste disposal intensity is half (Figure 55). Fisheries waste disposal is similar to household waste disposal, however the fisheries disposal of plastics is almost double that of residents per day.  Plastic disposal by sector Figure 56 provides a visual outline of the different types of plastic waste generated by each sector. PET dominates each sector except for tourism. APWC 2020 audit data indicate that PET water bottles and PET bottles for beverages other than water represent 62% of household PET, 93% of commercial PET and 82% of fisheries PET. HDPE is the second most common type of plastic in the household and commercial sector. Home and body care and cleaning products were 45% of household disposal and 12% of commercial, while food containers were 36% of commercial and light shopping bags represented 51% of household HDPE.  The category plastics ‘Other’ comprises mostly multi-layer plastics used in packaging and other ‘complex’ packaging types. This category is the second most common category in the fisheries sector.  To determine the amount of domestic plastic waste produced each year, APWC aggregated customs data for imports and exports of raw plastics, food and drink items and manufactured plastic items. For each item imported, a lifespan per product was estimated (see Appendix F: Lifespan of materials) as well as the percentage of the imported weight consisting of plastic that would ultimately become waste. If we suppose that the household and commercial, tourism and fishing sectors leak plastic at the same rates as the median estimate for Grenada overall, each sector will produce the quantities of leakage each year that are shown in Table 42. Table 43: Leakage rates (tonnes per year) per plastic polymer per sector, Grenada Table 44: Leakage intensity per plastic polymer per sector, Grenada Plastic waste management  Overall plastic leakage (1–7) This section investigates the amount of plastic waste leaked into the environment across the seven plastic polymer types in Grenada. A breakdown of material types in each category can be found in Appendix F.  Figure 57 above outlines the plastic material flow for all seven (7) plastic types over a 12-month period. The audit suggests that 100% of all plastics entering Grenada are imported and less than 1% originate from waste offloaded or discarded from cruise ships and airlines. On average, 68% of all plastic material imported into Grenada is managed by landfilling post-consumer goods. Less than 1% of all plastics entering Grenada are exported for recycling. Figure 58: Plastic flows for Grenada by polymer type Grenada passed the Non-biodegradable Waste Control Act in 2018, which appears to ban import or manufacture of any non-biodegradable product unless permission is explicitly granted. Single-use plastic bags, straws and polystyrene (Styrofoam) food containers were banned in 2018. Single-use plastic shopping bags were explicitly banned from February 2019 and Styrofoam was banned from March 2019. Grenada banned plastic utensils in stages between March 2020 and March 2021. Overall, slightly fewer single-use plastic bags and slightly more expanded polystyrene products were found in Grenada waste compared with other countries with bans in place. There is almost negligible collection of plastics for recycling in Grenada. If a recycling system is to be implemented, an opportunity exists to capture recyclable material not currently included in the existing bans by developing additional legislative measures, such as CDL schemes.  High plastic leakage across all sectors Lack of overall awareness on plastic leakage across all sectors Dumfries, in Carriacou, is experiencing a marked increase in animals entering, scavenging and consuming waste directly from the landfill. The area urgently requires suitable fencing to prevent animals from entering the landfill and in order to properly monitor all waste. The landfill cell being constructed at Perseverance has a remaining life expectancy of five years. After this time, Grenada has no formal plans for waste disposal. As a result of the analysis conducted by APWC, an 80% recovery of organics would allow the capacity to be extended by approximately five years. Recovering other materials, including PET, HDPE, glass, nappies, e-waste and white goods, would extend capacity for an additional year. Source separation and an industrial composting facility are required and recommended to achieve these goals. An additional strategy to reduce waste in the landfill could be the banning of plastic water bottles smaller than 1.5 litres. Source separation should be conducted by all sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries – to ensure organics and plastics are recovered. Three local and successful examples of this are the segregated bin stations at the marina, the brewery that rewards the return of glass bottles and the recycler in Carriacou that collects plastic containers. APWC strongly suggests that the government financially support recycling initiatives through a CDL system. Accommodation facilities, including resorts and hotels, are not segregating waste and are not encouraged to do so. A licensing system could be implemented, where only hotels and resorts with good waste reduction and management practices can obtain a licence renewal. Waste segregation will not only decrease the volume of waste in the landfill and thereby increase its lifespan, but it will also decrease leakage into the environment. CDL collection bins should be made accessible, especially for fishing marinas located considerable distances from the main city areas.  The import levy on beverage containers should include plastic preforms, as most plastic containers are imported as preforms.  High plastic leakage across all three sectors Awareness raising on plastic pollution for residents and tourists; sdditional legislation to further limit the use of single-use plastics.  Lack of overall awareness on plastic leakage across all sectors  Awareness campaigns should include residents, tourists and fishers. Before entering the country, tourists could be instructed (via a video presentation) about the environmental impacts of plastic pollution in Grenada and also encouraged to sign a pledge to preserve and protect Grenada. Fishers could participate in workshops and training sessions to discuss the impact of plastic leakage on the fisheries sector and share strategies to alleviate the adverse effects of plastic leakage. These workshops and training sessions could become a requirement for obtaining a fishing licence. 
