There is one plastics aggregator in Antigua (ABWREC), and any plastics collected are shipped offshore for recycling, which is expensive and subsidised through sale of other recyclable materials. Antigua and Barbuda have implemented legislation in an effort to transition away from single-use plastic materials. The audit findings suggest that compliance rates have proved the success of the bans, however, there is a significant gap in capturing and successfully managing materials that are recyclable such as organics, plastics such as bottles and containers, and metals. Such gaps are mainly due to:  Failure to manage legacy plastic material that has been dumped into unsanitary landfills, stockpiled or leaked into the environment. Households dispose of 24,172 tonnes of waste per year of which 1,830 tonnes is plastics. Commercial businesses dispose of 71,854 tonnes of waste per year of which 884 tonnes is plastics. Overall tourists generate twice as much waste as an Antiguan resident per capita and contribute 16% of all plastics disposed of in Antigua. Fisher folk waste other than fishing gear contributed 0.7% of all plastic waste generated in Antigua and Barbuda. Plastic disposal contribution per sector During 2019, 3,254 tonnes of plastic was disposed of in Antigua and Barbuda. The figure below outlines the disposal rate in tonnes per year and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector. Soft plastic packaging made of Other (7) plastic was the largest disposed plastic item in Antigua and Barbuda in 2019. Each of the top 10 items disposed of was single-use packaging.  Plastic leakage  Overall, it was estimated that 17.18% (95% credible interval: 8%–24%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Antigua and Barbuda; this equates to 724 tonnes. Plastic leakage per sector During 2019 the largest contributor of plastic leakage was the household (371 tonnes per year) and commercial sector (211 tonnes per year). Plastic leakage for the tourism (91 tonnes per year) and fisheries (4 tonnes per year) sectors are significantly smaller than the household and commercial sector. Tourism sector: Prepare a targeted single-use plastics strategy and extend plastic bans to include airlines and cruise ships to prevent accumulating further banned materials in landfills. Tourism sector: Investigate the reuse potential for plastic material. Seventy-five per cent of all the plastic ever made has become waste (WTO, 2020). Plastic waste pollution presents numerous current and future challenges from design, production, consumption and disposal that must be tackled across the entire lifecycle of plastics. Most global efforts to mitigate plastic waste and identify leakage sources are focused on mainland countries, with little attention placed on Small Island Developing States (SIDS), whose cultures and economies greatly depend on the wealth of resources provided by oceans. The costs related to plastic pollution and climate-related impacts on SIDS are hugely disproportionate to the contribution of plastics. Caribbean islands are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of plastic leakage into marine and land-based ecosystems. Marine pollution is now ubiquitous in SIDS, posing a serious threat to the pristine ecosystems highly valued for tourism, fisheries and other valuable commodities and the health and well-being of Caribbean island communities. Addressing marine pollution is an ecological, economic and social priority, particularly in a region where the health of the ocean is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the lives of the indigenous inhabitants of this region. Apart from SIDS being affected by plastic pollution originating from faraway sources, considerable amounts of plastic waste are being produced in the islands as well. The average waste disposal of SIDS inhabitants is 2.30 kilograms per person per day, which is 48% higher than the world average of 1.55 kilograms. Plastics represent about 8% of municipal solid waste (UNEP, 2019). To close the global plastic waste pollution gap, in 2019, with support from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Didier and Martine Primat Foundation, IUCN launched the Plastic Waste Free Islands (PWFI) initiative, as part of its global Close the Plastic Tap Programme. PWFI is a three-year initiative working in three regions: the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Pacific. The initiative’s overarching goal is to drive the circular economy agenda forward and to reduce plastic waste disposal and leakage from islands. Marine plastic litter Plastics leak into the ocean through a number of channels, including direct dumping of mismanaged or uncollected waste or land dumping that eventually makes its way to the marine environment (61% of total microplastic leakage). Mismanaged collected waste is also disposed of in landfill sites which then enters via land or air, or is illegally dumped into water (39% of total microplastic leakage) (Pew Charitable Trust and SystemsIQ, 2020). Studies of the concentration levels of plastics in the Caribbean Sea have ranged from 20 to 200,000 items per square kilometre (Diez et al., 2019). Flexible packaging (such as films, wraps and bags) and multilayer materials (such as sachets, nappies and beverage cartons) represent a disproportionate share of leakage from land-based sources, at 46% and 26% respectively (Diez et al., 2019). From ocean-based sources, a global meta-analysis study looked at global fishing gear losses for different major gear types, estimating that 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines are lost around the world each year (Richardson, Hardesty and Wilcox, 2019). A 2016 report predicted that by 2025 for every three tonnes of fish there will be one tonne of plastic waste in the ocean, so that by 2050 there will be more plastic than fish in the ocean (World Economic Forum et al., 2016). Plastic leakage The accumulation of plastic waste in oceans from domestic, industrial and fishing activities is an emerging issue globally. The increasing popularity of plastic, combined with low recycling rates, is increasing the amount of plastic leakage into the environment, with current global indications placing leakage at 3% or 12 million tonnes per year of total plastic produced (IUCN, 2020). The purpose of this project is to make a significant and quantified reduction in plastic waste disposal and leakage in six SIDS in two ocean regions – the Caribbean (Saint Lucia, Grenada, and Antigua and Barbuda) and the Pacific (Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa). The project aims to generate credible data and analysis to understand each country’s current plastic leakage status. This is calculated through a National Level Quantification of Plastic Waste and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in three key sectors: tourism, fisheries, solid waste management by household and commercial. It supports waste reduction on the islands through analysis of entire value chains – from production to disposal – and of plastic usage and wastage across the different sectors. The plastic waste data mapping will track seven materials in an island-wide plastic influx and outflux format (including imports and exports at a national level) to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked per island, per sector. Data collection was supported by a stakeholder assessment, involving comprehensive interviews and discussions with plastics producers, users and other key stakeholders, as shown in Figure 3 below. This report presents the plastics flow analysis and leakage analysis for Antigua and Barbuda. Antigua and Barbuda is a signatory to the main waste international agreements. In 1988 Antigua and Barbuda became signatory to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), which aims at preventing both accidental pollution and pollution from routine vessel operations. In 2012, Antigua and Barbuda entered the Global Partnership on Marine Litter, increasing its commitment to reduce plastic pollution. Antigua and Barbuda is also a signatory to the Basel Convention, Control on Transboundary Movement of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. In 2020, Antigua and Barbuda also ratified the Litter Control Act no3 and Amendment to Annex II, VIII and IX to the Basel Convention.  The External Trade (Shopping Plastic Bags Prohibition) Order 2017—prohibits the importation, distribution, sale and use of shopping plastic bags after 30 June 2016. It also outlines exemptions. Antigua and Barbuda has introduced prevention and abatement measures, which aim to reduce the negative impacts of plastic waste to create a cleaner environment and improve international investment, tourism and economic growth. Addressing marine pollution is a key component of this strategic approach.  The ‘Antigua and Barbuda Declaration’ aims to encourage all Caribbean countries to eliminate the use of single-use plastics and collaborate to end pollution of the oceans. In addition, blanket bans on source materials, such as shopping bags, have been implemented. To reduce the impact of plastic waste, the government of Antigua and Barbuda has introduced the following bans. Plastic bans Antigua and Barbuda became the first nation within the Caribbean region to take extensive action on single-use plastics. Prior to 2016, Antigua and Barbuda was consuming 2 million plastic bags per year (Hill, 2016) and supermarkets distributed 90% of plastic waste, including single-use plastic bags. An importation ban of plastic bags was implemented in January 2016, followed by a ban on the use of plastic bags in July 2016. In 2017 the Styrofoam ban for all food-industry businesses was implemented over three, six-month phases. The impact of the plastic bag and Styrofoam ban has been evident in the proportion of plastic waste detected at Cook’s Landfill, which prior to the ban in 2006 was at 19.5%, dropping to 4.4% after the ban in 2017 (Diez, 2018). The government of Antigua and Barbuda have approved a number of tax-free alternatives for Styrofoam, which include sugarcane/bagasse, PLA Corn starch (non-GMO), wheat straw, bamboo, cardboard/paper, areca palm and potato starch. APWC waste audits in March 2020 confirmed that banned material remains in community circulation, however, in much lower proportions than expected, indicating a success of the single-use plastic bag ban. Audit data suggests that single-use plastic bags account for 11.5 tonnes of waste disposal at Cook’s Landfill annually. This accounts for 0.02% of the total household and commercial solid waste by weight and 0.03% by volume. Polystyrene items accounted for 0.08% of the total waste stream by weight and 2.5% of the total volume disposed at Cook’s Landfill annually. In total, expanded polystyrene items such as bowls, plates, beverage cups, lids and caps, straws, forks, knives, spoons, fruit/vegetable/meat trays and egg cartons account for 84 tonnes of waste disposal annually. This is half of that found in places with no bans in place, for example in Palau (APWC, 2019). It is worth noting that airlines and cruise ships in Antigua and Barbuda are currently exempt from polystyrene and single-use plastic bag bans. Polystyrene accounts for 2.0% of the total weight of airline waste, or 10.3 tonnes per year and accounts for approximately 12% of total polystyrene waste in Antigua each year. Levies are placed on importation of plastic beverage containers, however, there is no levy placed on the production of the same or similar containers within Antigua and Barbuda. Without ring-fencing, there is a lack of accountability on managing the end of life of materials with money emanating from these levies. Plastic import, manufacturing and recycling in Antigua and Barbuda During 2018, Antigua and Barbuda imported plastic or rubber products/articles from 84 different countries, amounting to almost USD 25 million. Exports for the same period to 27 identified countries in the world was USD 353,000. The annual overall plastic import for 2018–2019 was 3,837 tonnes. Table 3 outlines the top five imported and exported goods to/from Antigua and Barbuda. Plastic producers Plastic waste initiatives  A number of initiatives are currently underway in Antigua and Barbuda to improve waste management practices, improve recycling and reduce leakage. Therefore, APWC recommends that any projects that are designed to improve future outcomes must work closely with these projects (Table 4). There are a small number of grassroot champion groups focusing on collecting plastic material leaked into the environment. Adapt a Coastline operates regular beach clean-up activities, collecting (on average) 100 bags of litter per month, and upcycling plastic bottles into storage bins and other reusable items. ABWREC is the only plastic recycler in Antigua and Barbuda, it was established with funds from GEF Small Grants Program and the Rotary Club in Antigua, and it operates on grounds donated by Antigua Distillery Ltd which manufactures alcohol and water. ABWREC is currently the only recycler collecting and recycling plastic material. There are four other recyclers that collect recyclable materials such as metal, used oils, glass, plastics and batteries; details can be found in Appendix C. The audit found that recyclers have sufficient machinery that is not currently used to full capacity. In addition, staff are capable of maintaining this machinery, indicating that the private sector has the ability to expand plastic recycling operations. However, the greatest challenge at present is the cost of recycling plastics. ABWREC noted that its operations are subsidising plastic recycling though the on sell of other materials such as batteries and metals that have a higher value than plastics. There is an opportunity to expand drop-off and collection systems for recyclable material throughout Antigua for delivery to ABWREC. In order for other recyclers on the island to expand their business model to accept plastics, assistance from the government would be required or a sustainable financing mechanism such as a container deposit levy will need to be introduced. In October 2015, Antigua and Barbuda announced growing environmental concern relating to domestic and industrial waste to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Waste to energy was proposed and preliminary investigations at Cook’s Landfill suggested that approximately 80,000 tonnes of potential feedstock for conversion to energy was available. Technical studies were due for completion in 2020 with the intention of completing construction of a waste-to-energy (WTE) plant by 2025 (Government of Antigua and Barbuda, 2015). APWC calculations predict that without removing recyclable material, 67,783 tonnes of feedstock would be available for conversion to energy based on the 2020 audit. Removal of plastic material only would reduce feedstock availability to 64,496 tonnes. If 100% of recyclable material were removed from the feedstock, including plastic material, organics, paper and cardboard, and biodegradable material, only 16,063 tonnes of waste would remain available for WTE. During early 2019, plastic drum litter receptacles in the city were replaced by 80 new general waste and recycling bins to improve the streetscape aesthetics for tourists and to deter litter and illegal dumping. Some commercial businesses and hotels have waste compactors on site that are used to dispose of all waste types. In some cases, businesses such as resorts will separate green waste, e.g. garden refuse, and reuse it for compost on resort grounds. There is no segregation of recyclable material (plastics, glass, paper and cardboard) or organic waste prior to collection from households or commercial businesses but segregated bins are located within the city. However, source separation is encouraged by the non-profit organisation Antigua & Barbuda Waste Recycling Corporation (ABWREC) and is undertaken voluntarily by schools, some individual households and commercial premises on a small scale. Households and commercial businesses self-haul recyclable material to the recycling facility, whereas materials from schools are collected by SWMA for delivery to ABWREC. The APWC audit notes a high level of compliance with the collection service lending itself to a low leakage rate. Ninety-four per cent (94%) of interviewees stated that their household waste is disposed for collection through the household and commercial collection system provided by the NSWMA. Five per cent (5%) responded that they hire a private contractor to collect rubbish bags. One household reported burning its waste and another reported flushing waste. Specifically, 12% reported dumping green waste to land, 5% burnt green waste material and 11% composted of which only one household composted in their own garden. Seven per cent (7%) or 16 interviewees self-hauled plastic material to ABWREC for recycling, while one interviewee reported self-hauling plastic material to Cook’s Landfill and two households (1%) reported that plastic waste was burned. Audit interview data determined that 80% expressed a willingness to separate recyclable waste. This suggests that any recycling programmes implemented would have a high chance of succeeding. Auditors queried households about their willingness to purchase bags for the purpose of disposing of recyclables such as plastic bottles, cans, glass, metal and cardboard for collection on a weekly basis. Over half of those surveyed (53%) would not be willing to purchase recycling bags, less than a quarter (21%) interviewed said they would be willing to purchase a bag for recycling purposes. This indicates that even though 80% of the residents are interested in recycling only 21% are willing to pay for a recycling service. If a fee for recycling were charged, a well-developed and targeted education campaign would be necessary to get the community on board. All commercial premises in Antigua and Barbuda disposed of general waste through collections arranged with contractors who transfer the waste to Cook’s Landfill. Eighty-five per cent (85%) of commercial premises reported disposing of their green waste in the same collection as the general waste, while 10% compost green waste material. For plastics, again, the general waste collection was the most favoured form of disposal with 89% of commercial premises using this format. Eleven per cent (11%) of commercial premises reported that plastics were transported to ABWREC for recycling. During 2019, the overall household and commercial waste disposal rate in Antigua and Barbuda equalled 96,025 tonnes per year. Of this, 2.8% was plastic waste, contributing 83% of the overall plastics disposal for Antigua and Barbuda. Combined, organic waste (39.2%), construction waste (14.8%), metals (12.1%) and wood (10.1%) account for 76% of the waste generated by the household and commercial sector in Antigua and Barbuda. Of this, 51% (organics and metals) are recyclable but these materials are currently sent to landfill. The high disposal rate of wood may be associated with disposal of wooden pallets and wood used to board up properties during hurricane preparation. Interestingly, biodegradable plastics introduced as a plastic alternative per the plastic bans accounted for just 0.5% of the waste disposed. Given the lack of landfill space available at Cook’s Landfill, composting waste from households and commercial premises would provide the single largest impact for better management of disposed waste. It should be noted that many of the hygiene products, textiles, e-waste and construction materials are either entirely or partially composed of synthetic polymers, meaning that the proportion of plastics in Antigua and Barbuda household and commercial waste is in fact greater than 2.8%. These categories were kept separate from plastic waste to ensure that the analysis was accurate for pure polymer types. For a more detailed breakdown of all categories, please see Appendix D: Material types and sort form. Disposal rates for commercial businesses are considerably higher than that of households. Figure 26 illustrates that commercial businesses contribute a higher proportion of the total percentage of disposed waste across all categories when compared with households, except for plastic, hygiene and glass. The proportion of organics in household waste (40.9%) is higher than the proportion in commercial waste (38.6%). However, with respect to the quantity, commercial waste contained almost three times more organic material than households, highlighting the importance for better management of organics. Diverting organics from landfill may provide opportunities to increase landfill life, reduce combustible material and better manage residual plastic waste. Interestingly, households dispose of twice as much plastic as commercial premises and  five times as much glass, whereas commercial businesses dispose of eight times more glass than households do. Plastic waste disposal by households and commercial premises Plastic disposal by weight Households generally produce more plastic waste in Antigua and Barbuda than commercial premises (Table 9). The overall plastic disposal rate in Antigua and Barbuda for the period 2019 was 2,714 tonnes per year. Household plastic disposal accounts for 1,830 tonnes of the total plastics disposal rate, which equates to 0.06 kg per resident per day while commercial premises dispose of 884 T/y of plastic waste, equating to 0.05 kg per employee per day. According to the polymer type, the most prevalent plastic waste disposed of in Antigua and Barbuda is made up of Other (7) plastics (Figure 27), comprising almost half of commercial waste and over one-third of household waste. Top 10 plastic items The top 10 plastic items that could be categorised by polymers 1–7 produced by households and commercial businesses (Table 10) included banned single-use lightweight plastic bags, accounting for 9.6% of the top 10 plastic waste items disposed of overall for this sector. Households (12.2%) and commercial businesses (21.9%) disposed of soft plastic packaging waste made from Other (7) plastics most frequently. However, of the top 10 items overall, HDPE (2) items featured most frequently for households (8.7% combined) and commercial businesses (10.3% combined). PET (1) items featured twice for household disposal (18.2%) in the form of plastic beverage bottles; the same items featured in addition to Other PET (1) materials in top plastic items for commercial PET disposal (15.8%). A majority of the top 10 plastic items disposed of by this sector, such as PET, HDPE and other single-use plastics, are not currently included within Antigua and Barbuda’s plastic ban or other national policies.  Of note is items of other plastic material or composite materials containing more than 70% plastic that could not be categorised clearly as polymer 1–7, and these were grouped in a separate category called other plastics. This category contributed 24.4% (471.7 T/y) to the overall plastic material disposed of by households and 1.9% (193.3 T/y) for commercial businesses. Plastic waste leakage  According to our model based on estimates at 95% credible interval, plastic is leaked in Antigua and Barbuda at a rate of 17.58% (7.6%–24%). This equates to approximately 371 tonnes per year of household waste and 211 tonnes per year of commercial plastic waste leakage into the environment (Table 11). At present, the largest mitigating factor to prevent plastic leakage is to manage plastic waste by landfill disposal; however, current practices do not follow best practice procedures in turn increasing the risk of plastic leakage into the environment. Although there are small scale, mostly voluntary recycling operations undertaken by ABWREC with capacity to increase operations, at present there is a lack of appropriate legislation to monitor and manage feedstock of plastic waste and support recyclers appropriately. In addition, there is a failure to manage legacy plastic material that has been dumped into unsanitary landfill, stockpiled or leaked into the environment. The audit identified several key gaps and recommendations when focusing on management of plastic waste in the solid waste management sector, as outlined in Table 12. Three resort establishments compact waste prior to collection, although waste is not separated before compaction. One resort (Galley Bay Resort and Spa) segregated glass bottles for recycling into sand using an onsite glass crusher (Figure 30). The remaining locations disposed of their uncompacted waste prior to being sent to landfill. Ninety-three per cent (93%) of accommodation locations reported that plastic waste was disposed of through waste collections by private contractors, 7% self-hauled plastics to ABWREC. A majority of interviews noted that green waste was collected by waste contractors. Only four respondents noted that green waste was composted on site, with one stating that green waste was dumped to land and another stating that they burned green waste. Food waste was segregated by two resorts for collection by a local farm as feed for livestock (pigs).  All yacht tourists (100%) reported offloading general waste generated on board at the port, which is then delivered to Cook’s Landfill. Eleven of the 12 interviews reported that all plastic waste is offloaded at the port and taken to landfill. Thirty-three per cent (33%) of interviewees reported food waste is offloaded at the port, half of these specifying that food waste was taken to landfill. Fifty-eight per cent (58%) reported food waste was dropped into the ocean. Waste from cruises ships is transferred to a barge that services the port area at St John’s. The barge operates during daylight hours, seven days a week. Cruise passengers pay an environmental levy of USD 1.50 each, which goes directly to the NSWMA. Despite cruise vessels segregating waste on board, all waste is disposed of into a 40-cubic metre skip bin on a barge and is transported to Cook’s Landfill for disposal. Every trip that this skip bin makes is charged at USD 800, plus?? USD 40 per tonne of waste and USD 1 per gallon of sewage waste. There is no special treatment for quarantine waste. CDL containers such as plastic beverage containers, glass and cans are source separated and deposited in Barbados where a container deposit system is in place. Plastic and general waste disposed of by land- and sea-based tourism is either collected or self-hauled to ABWREC for recycling. However, disposal practices for organic waste vary between land-based and sea-based tourism. For the former, over half of all organic waste is collected (53%) or self-hauled (11%) to landfill, composted (18%), dumped to land (16%) or burned (3%). On the other hand, the fate of organic waste in sea tourism looks very different, with 82% being dumped overboard. Anecdotally, there is no evidence of source separation in the kitchen bins on board ships. This means that most packaging material that is placed in kitchen bins also is dumped at sea.  During 2019, the tourism sector generated 6,267 tonnes of waste (see Appendix G for the calculation of waste disposal by tourists in Antigua and Barbuda). Of this, 516 tonnes were plastic, contributing 16% of the overall plastics disposal for Antigua and Barbuda. Unsurprisingly, organic waste accounted for the largest amount of waste disposal (35.8%) of the total amount of waste generated by the tourism sector. The second most common category is paper and cardboard (23.6%), followed by glass (11.6%) and plastics (8.2%) (Figure 37). There is no national legislation or national guidelines on the reception, transport and disposal of waste from cruise ships, yachts or aeroplanes and there is a lack of monitoring and enforcement of waste receipt, handling and final disposal from cruise ships. The audit confirms that land-based accommodation is responsible for the largest share (69%) of overall waste disposal by weight across the sector (Figure 38). However, cruise ships contributed 3% more PET than land-based accommodation, which can be associated with the large number of PET beverage containers offloaded by cruise ships when disposing of waste. In addition, cruise ships also disposed of significant amounts of Other (7) plastics (30%), overall contributing 26% of all plastic waste disposed of by the tourism sector. Waste disposal for airline tourists accounted for 7% of the total waste disposal for the sector. Airlines disposed of the largest amount of polypropylene (PP, 5) (61%) and polystyrene (PS, 6) (80%) in the tourism sector. It is important to note that airlines, cruise ships and yachts are not currently required to comply with plastic bans in Antigua and Barbuda. Overall, yachts contribute 7% of the total waste disposal for the sector, mostly disposing of a significant amount of PET (1) (26%), Other (7) plastics (8%), and the largest share of aluminium (39%). Tourists also contribute indirectly to the disposal of sewage, bulky and construction waste through the operation of tourist businesses, although these waste streams typically contain much less plastic than household and commercial solid waste. Tourists overall spent 2.7 million nights in Antigua during 2018, compared with roughly 29 million person-nights spent by residents. Therefore, it could be estimated that tourists also contribute indirectly to the disposal of 9% of sewage, bulky and construction waste. These figures were combined with composition data to estimate the disposal rate of each category of material. Plastic waste disposal and leakage The tourism sector disposed of 516 tonnes of plastic waste per year. Table 18 and Figure 39 outline the breakdown of plastics per tourism subsector.  Plastic waste composition by polymer across subsectors Top 10 plastic items The top 10 plastic items accounted for 87% of all plastic waste disposed of by the tourism sector. The most common is single-use plastic bottles made of PET (1), HDPE (2) garbage bags and plastic packing made of Other (7) (Table 19). Food and beverage plastic packaging are prevalent in the top 10 items; in addition, all items on the Top 10 list are defined as single-use plastics. Of note is that items of other plastic material or composite materials containing more than 70% plastic that could not be categorised clearly as plastic 1–7, and thus were grouped in a separate category called other plastics. This category contributed 6.2% (32.3 T/y) to the overall plastic material disposed of by the tourism sector. Plastic waste leakage Assuming the tourism sector leaks plastic at the same rate as the national rate of 17.18% (95% credible interval), it is estimated that the tourism sector leaks 91.5 tonnes of plastic waste per year (Table 20) into the environment and or disposes of it improperly (burning, burying, etc). Cruise ships – There are only a few reliable sources for the rate of waste generation (as opposed to disposal) by cruise ships, which makes it difficult to estimate how much waste has leaked. CE Delft 2017 performed audits of waste logs of many types of ships, including cruise ships, and provided estimates of the volume of waste produced per passenger, though these estimates are very imprecise. After accounting for uncertainty in waste disposal from our data and overall generation rates from CE Delft 2017, our median estimate for leakage or incineration of plastics was 51.5%. As it was not possible to obtain a precise figure for the rate of waste generation, data are consistent with cruise-ship leakage rates anywhere from 0% to 91%. Very little recycling is undertaken by the tourism sector. Some resorts recycle organic material on their own premises. This could be addressed by: implementing a CDL or similar; providing benefits to tourism businesses that segregate and transport all their recyclables (including plastic containers, cans and glass) to ABWREC; or through a licencing system, where only premises that are segregating and transporting all their recyclables to ABWREC are allowed to operate. The number of active fishing vessels fluctuates annually. On average, there are 250 to 380 domestic vessels operating in Antigua and Barbuda’s EEZ. During the 1970s, the domestic fishing fleet was dominated by wooden dories, but today has been replaced with fibreglass lances and pirogue wooden vessels (Horsford, 2004). Data obtained from the Antigua and Barbuda Fisheries Division state that of 263 active vessels in 2019 the hull material of eight vessels was wood and 11 wood-coated with fibreglass. The remaining 244 were fibreglass or plastic/rubber. Traditional methods and fishing gear continue to be used by domestic fishers. Plastic and fisheries  It is widely reported that 80% of marine pollution originates either directly or indirectly from land-based solid and liquid sources. The remaining 20% is derived from petroleum exploration and production, shipping, discarded fishing gear and the atmosphere (Diez, et al., 2019). Marine litter studies have quantified the concentration of plastic litter in the Caribbean to be as many as 200,000 items of plastic per square kilometre (Diez et al., 2019) which includes fishing gear such as rope, fishing net and lines, in addition to litter from fishing vessels, such as fibreglass and plastic antifouling. APWC calculates annual fishing gear imports including fishing nets, hooks, rods and other gear to be equivalent to 8.5 tonnes of which 1.7 tonnes is lost at sea annually. Plastic materials other than fishing gear A large majority of domestic fishing vessels in Antigua and Barbuda are engaged in same-day or overnight fishing operations, with operators taking subsistence items such as food, water and drink containers on board. Vessels engaged in multi-day operations are more likely to take plastic items such as food packaging (e.g. bags with rice, pasta, sugar, drink mix, salt and other seasonings), food, and water and drink containers. Other materials containing plastic include buckets, life jackets, flares and sounding equipment. Common plastics in fishing gear Data obtained from the Antigua and Barbuda Fisheries Division outlines that in 2019, 263 domestic vessels were operating, with 54% of vessels primarily using lines to catch targeted species, 32% using traps and 5% gill nets. Fishing lines are predominantly made of plastic material such as nylon, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF, also called fluorocarbon), polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE). ALDFG is considered the main source of plastic waste in the marine environment, coming from the fisheries and aquaculture sector (FAO, 2016). A Caribbean study reported that the majority of ALDFG was found underwater (60%) and traps were the most common type of gear (41%), followed by various types of nets (25%) (Matthews, 2009; Figure 3.1.3). This is worsened by severe weather events such as storm surges or hurricanes in Antigua and Barbuda. Derelict fishing gear floating on the ocean surface or resting on the ocean floor can continue to trap non-target organisms, a process known as ghost fishing (Lusher et al., 2017 and NOAA, 2015). Plastics projects and the fisheries sector Ninety per cent (90%) of all interviewees reported that general fisheries waste is offloaded at port and is taken to landfill, 10% reported ‘other’. When queried about plastic waste disposed, again 90% reported that plastics are offloaded at port into a public waste bin located in the port area and taken to landfill, and 10% reported ‘other’. Thirty-five per cent (35%) of interviewees responded that organic waste was taken to port, with the remaining 65% reporting ‘other’; it is assumed that this waste is thrown overboard. However, the fisheries sector waste audit accounted for no organic waste, which suggests that some food scraps may be offloaded overboard. Twenty per cent (20%) of interviewees noted consideration of their waste management practices and 10% upcycling of materials, such as using plastic containers for marking the location of fishing line. It is estimated that approximately 300 fishing vessels operate out of Antigua. During a 12-month period in 2019 we estimated that the fisheries sector disposed of around 160 tonnes of solid wastes annually, of which 23 tonnes are various plastics. The most prevalent waste item disposed waste glass (50%) followed by paper and cardboard (27%) and plastics (14%). Recyclable aluminium material accounts for 2.8% of all fisheries waste disposed, such as beverage containers and food containers. Audit data suggests that of the aluminium containers taken aboard fishing vessels are 50% alcoholic and 50% non-alcoholic beverage containers. Plastics disposal and leakage During 2019, the fisheries sector disposed of 23 tonnes of plastic waste. PET (1) accounted for 63% of the total plastic waste disposed. Other (7) plastics accounted for 19%, PP (5) 10% and HDPE (2) 8%. A majority of the items disposed of reveal that most waste generated by the fisheries sector is not related to fishing activities, but the consumption of food and beverages. The composition of PET waste included water bottles under 500 millilitres and beverage containers, other beverage containers under 500 millilitres and semi-rigid food trays. Paper and cardboard materials included liquid paperboard (LP) beverage containers such as juice containers. PP materials included bottle lids and flexible packaging for food. Organic material was comprised of biodegradable plastic alternatives such as PLA (cornstarch) food containers and cutlery. When these items are dumped at sea, they should be classified as ocean-based pollution, even though they are not directly linked to marine activities per se (fishing, sailing, petrochemical exploration). However, it is a practice that consumption-related items recovered in beach and seafloor assessments are associated with land activities. This is a good example of how plastic pollution assessments could potentially underestimate the proportion of ocean-based plastic pollution to land-based. Commonly disposed plastic items The audit found four commonly used plastic items in fisheries waste (Table 27), but interestingly no fishing gear was disposed of at the time, although fishing gear was noted in household waste. The most common plastic found in fisheries waste was single use PET (1) beverage containers (not water), shampoo body wash HDPE (2) containers and PET (1) water beverage containers. Container lids made of PP (5) accounted for 2% of all plastic waste in the fisheries sector. Of note are items of other plastic material or composite materials containing more than 70% plastic that could not be categorised clearly as plastic 1–7; these were grouped in a separate category called other plastics. This category contributed 19% (4.4 T/y) to the overall plastic material disposed of by the tourism sector. The material composition and weight of each gear type was applied to the potential leakage rates of fishing gear as per Table 27 to ascertain the potential leakage rates per country of interest based on the polymer composition in Table 28. The calculations assume that in Antigua and Barbuda overall, nylon material (Other 7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon 2% and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type by gear type is shown in Table 30. Each country provided import data linked to Harmonised System (HS) codes related to plastic material in fishing gear. In 2019, approximately 8.51 tonnes of fishing gear containing plastic components were imported. It is important to note however, that import data is missing (Table 31) as it was not received on request. The Antigua fishing fleet comprises approximately 320 vessels, or 0.01% of the world’s 3.7 million-vessel fleet (Rosseau et al., 2019). Hull scrapings from anti-fouling coatings or composite hull materials lost through wear and cleaning are recognised as a source of microplastic pollution in the ocean. Sundt, Schulze and Syversen (2014) estimate that Norwegian recreational vessels emit around 0.5 kilogram of microplastics per annum. As domestic fishing vessels in Antigua are larger in size on average than recreational vessels, it can be estimated that they might shed 1 kilogram per vessel per year. Overall, we estimate with considerable uncertainty that the Antigua fishing fleet sheds 320 kilograms of microplastics per year. Plastic Flow Analysis Plastic waste disposal in Antigua and Barbuda The overall plastic disposal rate in Antigua and Barbuda for 2019 was 3,254 tonnes per year. Figure 50 highlights that overall the tourism sector has the greatest impact on plastic waste disposal, in particular yachts. Household plastic disposal accounts for 1,830 tonnes per year of the total plastics disposal rate, which equates to 0.06 kilograms per resident per day. Commercial premises disposed of 884 tonnes per year of plastic waste, equating to 0.05 kilogram per employee per day and the fisheries sector is the smallest generator at 23 tonnes, which equates to 0.20 kilogram per vessel per day. Interestingly, while the tourism sector (516 T/y) contributes less plastic waste than households, the disposal intensity of land tourists (0.10 kg/tourist/day) is very similar to the household and commercial sector combined. Airline, cruise ship and yacht waste disposal intensity is presented in kilograms per arrival and clearly indicates that the tourism sector should be targeted in all plastic reduction initiatives undertaken in Antigua and Barbuda. The overall plastic waste disposal rate across all the sectors – household, commercial, tourism and fisheries – has been estimated at around 3,254 tonnes per year (Figure 51). The sector that disposes of the most plastic waste by weight annually is the household sector (1,830 tonnes). However, the commercial sector contributes the highest disposal volume (118,195 m3), compared to households which generate 53,682 cubic metres. Other (7) plastics is the most common plastic polymer disposed of in household and commercial waste (38.3%). In tourism and fishing, PET is the most dominant plastic polymer (33% and 63% respectively). PET waste generated by the tourism industry most likely relates to water and other drink bottles (Figure 52). At present some of these materials are captured for recycling by accommodation operators, although this is currently undertaken on a voluntary basis. Soft plastic packaging made of Other (7) plastics was the largest disposed plastic item in Antigua and Barbuda in 2019. Each of the top 10 items disposed of was single-use packaging (Table 34). Plastic leakage across sectors To determine the amount of domestic plastic waste produced each year, APWC aggregated customs data for imports and exports of raw plastics, food and drink items and manufactured plastic items. For each item imported, a lifespan per product (see Appendix F: Lifespan of materials) and the percentage of the imported weight consisting of plastic that would end up as waste were estimated. different categorisation of plastics in the import and waste stream. Our estimate of leakage was based on a Bayesian model, which took as input the total waste disposal and imports for each polymer. It was assumed that the true rate of leakage for each polymer was close to the overall leakage rate, and that waste disposal and import figures may have a 10% systematic error, in addition to sampling error and year-to-year variation. These assumptions allow us to use the overall rate of leakage to provide more credible estimates for each individual polymer. See Appendix I: Bayesian model of tourist waste disposal for details of the model. Overall, it was estimated that 17.18% (95% credible interval: 8%–24%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill.If we suppose that the household and commercial, tourism and fishing sectors leak plastic at the same rates as the median estimate for Antigua and Barbuda overall (24% of plastics), each sector will produce the quantities of leakage each year that are shown in Table 36. A breakdown of the leakage rate per polymer type can be found in Table 35. Further analysis incorporating other sources of data investigated leakage rates from cruise ships. After accounting for uncertainty in waste disposal and overall disposal rates, the median estimate derived for leakage or incineration of plastics was 51.5%. However, the analysis was unable to obtain a precise figure for the rate of waste disposal, and leakage figures from cruise ships are consistent with leakage rates anywhere from 0% to 91%. For non-plastic waste, the best estimate  of leakage or incineration was 20%, with a credible interval  of 0% to 91%.Plastic leakage per polymer type Material flow analysis of the three sectors shows that overall 17% of post-consumer plastic is released into the environment through leakage. Eighty-two per cent (82%) of all plastic material imported into Antigua is managed by landfilling; Other (7) plastic, which contains various polymers not highly recyclable and most likely not being stockpiled for future recycling, has the highest landfill rate (87%). As expected, leakage rates directly correlate with the percentage of material managed through landfilling. Materials with high landfill rates have lower leakage rates and materials with lower landfill rates have higher leakage rates. Two of seven polymer types (PET and HDPE) enter recycling systems in Antigua, however recycling of these materials conducted by ABWREC only account for 3% and 2% respectively. Material is collected from small-scale recycling programmes, street recycling bins and by individual households and commercial business self-haul. Figure 54 above outlines the plastics material flow for all seven plastic types over a 12-month period in 2019. A breakdown of materials in each category can be found in Appendix D: Material types and sort form.Opportunities exist to capture recyclable material not currently included in the existing bans by developing additional legislative measures. Most waste produced from banned plastic materials in Antigua and Barbuda comes through cruise liners and airlines and only a small fraction is currently recycled. There is significant opportunity to implement reuse and recycling initiatives to create a self-sustaining circular economy. For example, auditors noted that cruise ships did not offload PET beverage containers at port in Antigua. Informal interviews discovered that some cruise ships choose to offload PET bottles in Barbados where the Returnable Containers Act levies a BBD 10–20¢ refundable deposit on most beverage containers sold in Barbados. Extension of current plastic bans In addition, while Antigua and Barbuda’s ban on single-use plastics had a positive impact on the environment, reducing imports and expiry of petroleum-based plastics at landfill, bio-based biodegradable plastics do not necessarily degrade once disposed of due to the chemical additives used to create certain characteristics including longevity, and release carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere. Anaerobic digestion in an industrial composting facility or a biologically active landfill could capture methane to be used as bio-gas or in heat and electricity disposal. If 60% of banned material alternatives were captured, 264 tonnes of biodegradable material could be diverted from landfill each year. Avoid – To prevent plastic material leakage, further avoidance measures should be implemented to prevent plastics from entering the waste stream. Current bans should be used as a steppingstone to ban further plastic materials. Recycle – There is capacity to increase plastic recycling through current recyclers in Antigua. Feedstock is available and ABWREC have the infrastructure to increase operations to accept further recyclable material. However, additional drop-off and collection systems would need to be implemented to capture the additional material. Antigua and Barbuda have commenced preventive measures to reduce plastic waste disposal through the implementation of the External Trade (Shopping Plastic Bags Prohibition) Order, 2017 banning single-use shopping bags, single-use plastic utensils and EPS containers, and naked Styrofoam coolers. In addition, small-scale source separation and recycling of PET, HDPE and some metals is currently undertaken, however, there are many opportunities to further reduce waste to landfill and prevent plastic leakage into the environment. Transitioning away from single-use plastic materials has been effective on the twin islands and compliance rates have proved the success of the bans. However, there is a significant gap in capturing and successfully managing other recyclable material such as organics, other plastics such as bottles and containers, and metals. Recycling infrastructure is limited and not being used at its full capacity. There’s a small government programme to encourage waste segregation through schools, although there is a lack of associated legislation to manage recyclable material and to support recyclers. In addition, there is a failure to manage legacy plastic material that has been dumped into unsanitary landfill, stockpiled or leaked into the environment.Further extending the current plastic bans to include airlines and cruise ships would avoid accumulating further banned materials in the landfill. Targeted education for land- and sea-based tourists in conjunction with the provision of sustainable alternatives to plastics, such as reusable bottles for drinking water and non-packaged or refillable toiletries, could provide much needed plastic substitutes for the sector. The leakage of plastic material by the fisheries sector is small compared to terrestrial activities, however, the amount of microplastics derived from antifouling paints deposited into oceans annually should be further investigated and alternative solutions explored. Overall, Antigua and Barbuda’s efforts to reduce plastic waste through avoidance has built a strong foundation to leverage future waste and plastic management programmes moving forward.
