There is a general lack of waste management infrastructure beyond the capital of Port Vila. The main Vanuatu landfill – Bouffa (managed by Port Vila City Council and also used by Shefa Province Council) – has been upgraded to a semi-aerobic landfill, but the remaining areas of Vanuatu rely on insufficiently and inappropriately managed dumpsites, which can be considered potential sources of plastic leakage. Key facts: Plastic recycling is still non-existent in Vanuatu, although aggregation and stockpiling exists to a degree. RecycleCorp collects PET plastic and is planning to start a trial exporting it to Australia.  In July 2018, Vanuatu developed legislation to reduce environmental impacts of single-use plastic materials. The new Order 15 (Waste Management Regulations), issued under the Waste Management Act No. 24 of 2014, bans plastic bags, plastic straws and polystyrene takeaway boxes in its first phase. There is a 90% reduction in lightweight, single-use plastic bag usage when 2020 is compared to 2018 data. There is a lack of associated legislation to manage recyclable material and to support recyclers, in particular:   There is a failure to manage legacy plastic material dumped into unsanitary landfill, stockpiled or leaked into the environment. Overall, the tourism and fisheries sectors contribute larger amounts of plastic waste per day than the household and commercial sector (Figure 1).   Households dispose of 10,076 tonnes of waste per year of which 998 tonnes are plastics. Commercial business dispose of 7,404 tonnes of waste per year of which 716 tonnes are plastics. In commercial premises, the most common type of plastics disposed of is LDPE in the form of single-use soft plastic packaging, whereas in homes the top items include takeaway containers and other household items.  Vanuatu commercial premises dispose of 15 grams of plastic waste per employee per day. Vanuatu residents dispose of 9 grams of plastic waste per person per day.  More waste that is plastic is disposed of in Efate than in Espiritu Santo, in both sectors.  Overall, the tourism sector disposes of 2,613 tonnes of waste per year of which 246 tonnes are plastics.  Tourists generate more plastic waste than the residents and commercial businesses per capita per day.   The fisheries sector disposes of 233 tonnes of consumable plastic waste annually of which 66 tonnes are plastics.  Fisheries waste contributed 3.3% of all plastic waste generated in Vanuatu.  90 tonnes of consumable plastic are estimated to be leaked each year, which is more than that disposed of or captured.  The most common plastic material disposed of is PET in the form of plastic water bottles.  Plastics disposal contribution per sector During 2019, the overall plastic waste disposal rate, across all the sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries, was estimated at around 2,026.5 tonnes per year. Figure 2 presents the disposal rate in tonnes and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector. The most common plastic items in Vanuatu waste are single-use soft plastic packaging (LDPE), PET water bottles and Styrofoam packaging (PS).  Plastic leakage  Overall, we estimated that 58.8% (95% credible interval: 19%–82%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Vanuatu; this equates to 2,846 tonnes. Divert organics from landfill to provide longevity for the landfill and help manage the ‘difficult to manage/non-recyclable’ plastics and other materials.  Extend the single-use plastic ban and deposit systems to include tourism-generated waste.  Seventy-five per cent (75%) of all the plastic ever made has become waste (WTO, 2020). Plastic waste pollution presents numerous current and future challenges from design, production, consumption and disposal that must be tackled across the entire lifecycle of plastics. Most global efforts to mitigate plastic waste and identify leakage sources are focused on mainland countries, with little attention placed on small island developing states (SIDS), whose cultures and economies greatly depend on the wealth of resources provided by oceans. The costs related to plastic pollution and climate-related impacts on SIDS are hugely disproportionate to the contribution of plastics.  Pacific Island Countries (PICs), like other SIDS, are also vulnerable to the impacts of plastic leakage into marine and land-based ecosystems. Marine pollution is now ubiquitous in SIDS, posing a serious threat to the pristine marine ecosystems highly valued for tourism, fisheries and other valuable commodities, and significantly, the health and well-being of island communities. Addressing marine pollution is an ecological, economic and social priority, particularly in the Pacific region, a region extremely vulnerable to the impacts of global marine pollution. The health of the ocean is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the lives of the Indigenous inhabitants of the region. Although SIDS are adversely affected by plastic pollution originating from outside their regions, considerable amounts of plastic waste is being produced on the islands as well. In 2019, with support from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Didier and Martine Primat Foundation, IUCN launched the Plastic Waste Free Islands (PWFI) initiative to help close the global plastic waste pollution gap. As part of its Close the Plastic Tap Programme, PWFI is a three-year initiative working in three regions: the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Pacific. The initiative’s overarching goal is to drive the circular economy agenda forward and reduce plastic waste generation and leakage from islands. Marine plastic litter  Plastics leak into the ocean through a number of channels, including direct dumping of mismanaged or uncollected waste or land dumping that eventually makes its way to the marine environment (61% of total microplastic leakage).  In relation to ocean-based sources of plastic pollution, a global meta-analysis study investigated fishing gear losses for different major gear types, estimating that 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines are lost worldwide each year (Richardson, Hardesty and Wilcox, 2019). A 2016 report predicted that by 2025 for every three tonnes of fish there would be one tonne of plastic waste in the ocean; therefore, by 2050, there will be more plastic than fish in the ocean (World Economic Forum et al., 2016). Plastic leakage  The accumulation of plastic waste in oceans from domestic, industrial and fishing activities is an emerging global issue. The increasing popularity of plastic, combined with low recycling rates, is increasing the amount of plastic leakage into the environment, with current global indications placing leakage at 3% or 12 million tonnes per year of the total plastic produced (IUCN, 2020).  The purpose of this project is to make a significant and quantified reduction in plastic waste disposal and leakage in six SIDS in two ocean regions – the Caribbean (Saint Lucia, Grenada and Antigua and Barbuda) and the Pacific (Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa). The project aims to generate credible data and analysis to understand each country’s current plastic leakage status. This is calculated through a National Level Quantification of Plastic Waste and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in three key sectors: tourism, fisheries, household and commercial and solid waste management. It supports waste reduction on the islands through analysis of entire value chains – from production to disposal – and of plastic usage and wastage across the different sectors. The plastic waste data mapping will track seven materials in an island-wide plastic influx and outflux format (including imports and exports at a national level) to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked per island, per sector. Data collection was supported by a stakeholder assessment, involving comprehensive interviews and discussions with plastic producers, users and other key stakeholders, as shown below.   The need for international agreements arises from the requirement to regulate the incoming and outgoing movements of hazardous waste in countries and to ensure such waste is managed in a way that reduces the risk of harm to environmental and human health. A number of multilateral environmental agreements (conventions and protocols) relevant to waste management have been ratified by Vanuatu (See Appendix J: Multilateral agreements) including the latest additions: Basel, Rotterdam and Stockholm (BRS) Conventions. BRS conventions are international environmental treaties designed to reduce and control the movement of hazardous wastes, hazardous chemicals, pesticides and persistent organic pollutants. The Basel Convention now also includes plastic waste amendments, which were adopted at the 14th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Basel Convention (COP-14), in May 2019 (Basel Convention, 2021). These amendments have become effective as of 1 January 2021. The Vanuatu government is responsible for the implementation and enforcement of these Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEA), including measures that give effect to obligations under international agreements.   Plastic bans In 2020, Vanuatu developed a National Plastics Strategy 2020–2030. The strategy outlines five main goals: Reduce, Replace, Remediate, Re-capture, Reward. The current document is still in its draft form with the final version awaiting publication. Vanuatu’s government (Waste Management Regulation Order 15) has made several commitments towards the reduction of plastic waste and its prevention from entering the environment (DEPC, 2018a). From 1 July 2018, DEPC banned several single-use plastic items of priority for the reduction of plastic pollution, such as shopping bags, polystyrene takeaway boxes and plastic straws (Table 4). Exceptions to the ban include plastic bags to wrap fish or meat at point of sale and plastic straws that are an integral part of a product’s packaging, such as juice boxes. Fines range from VUV 50,000 up to VUV 1,000,000, or three months’ imprisonment may be imposed on individuals or corporations caught manufacturing or selling the banned items (APWC, 2019). An audit conducted in PVCC on 10 August 2018 (APWC, DEPC & J-PRISM) revealed that 12% of Port Vila’s waste consisted of plastic material, which represented 2% overall of plastics now prohibited by the plastic ban. A ban on nappies (diapers) was also underway but is currently in abeyance.  Plastic manufacturing, import and recycling in Vanuatu In 2011, more than USD 9 million worth of plastic and rubber goods were imported into Vanuatu, predominantly from East Asia and the Pacific. Australia, New Zealand, China, New Caledonia and France are some of the most relevant exporters of plastics to Vanuatu (World Bank, 2021a). Similarly, Vanuatu’s plastics and rubber are also exported mainly to Australia, New Caledonia and Fiji (World Bank, 2021b). According to APWC estimates, the overall quantity of imported plastics in 2018 equals 4,698 tonnes.  Plastic producers  There are several producers and suppliers producing goods either in plastic packaging or plastic items and materials in Vanuatu. Water in plastic bottles appears to be the most common plastic item produced (Table 6).  Plastic and waste initiatives The number of plastic and waste reduction initiatives in Vanuatu has increased in the past years, including Wan Smol Bag, No plastic bag, plis, Mama’s Vanuatu, Pango Green Force and 300 Coconut Bag. World Vision Vanuatu initiated a recycling programme Pem Bak Plastik. However, upon the closure of their collaborator Azure Pure Water, the programme ceased to exist. In 2021, a bottle buyback project was implemented through the support of multiple agencies, which successfully recovered one million PET bottles through a refund scheme. For more detail on plastics and waste initiatives in Vanuatu, see Table 7 and Table 8.  However, the fact that no effective plastic recycling currently occurs in Vanuatu needs to be addressed. The only plastic type collected for recycling is PET, which RecycleCorp is planning to export to Australia as a trial.  Household and commercial sector – Plastic quantification results Households and businesses place their waste in yellow plastic bags at the front of their premises on raised platforms, on the ground at front doors, at collection points and sometimes in cages (Figure 9). Household waste is collected twice a week, while commercial collections are undertaken every day along with the roadside litter bins. Commercial premises use any bags and the litter bins are lined using black bags. In total, 10 collection trucks are used in PVCC (Figure 10): six flatbeds and four compactors. PVCC employs 19 waste management staff, including the waste collection supervisor and waste management officer.  The results of interviews with Vanuatu residents and commercial property managers demonstrate that the majority of waste is usually collected by local waste service providers (Figure 11). Only 0.7% of household organic waste is dumped in the water; 5% of commercial plastic waste and 2% of commercial general waste is burned. The method of disposal for 18% of bulky household waste remains unknown, but it is potentially dumped in the environment. Most household plastic waste is collected, some is burned (0.6%), some self-hauled (0.6%), and for the rest it has not been specified.  In 2020, the overall household and commercial waste disposal rate in Vanuatu equalled 17,481 tonnes per year. The dominant category was organics (31.3%), which mainly consisted of food scraps, plant material from gardening, old baskets and other biodegradable natural materials (Figure 13). The second most common material category is paper and cardboard, contributing 23.1%, followed by metals (13.8%) and plastics (9.8%). It should be noted that many of the hygiene products, textiles, e-waste and construction materials are either entirely or partially composed of synthetic polymers, meaning the proportion of plastics in Vanuatu household and commercial waste is in fact greater than 9.8%. However, to ensure that the analysis was accurate for pure polymer types, these categories were kept separate from the other plastics. For a more detailed breakdown of all categories, see Appendix D: Material types and sort form. As expected, disposal rates in the household sector are considerably higher than the commercial sector because there are more residential properties than commercial premises in Vanuatu. It was estimated that households generate 10,076 tonnes of waste annually, while the commercial sector creates 7,404 tonnes per year. Households have a higher proportion of organic waste (36%) in the waste stream than the commercial sector (24.8%), while paper and cardboard are more common in commercial premises (28.9%) than in households (18.4%) (Figure 14). In households, plastics comprise 9.9% (998 tonnes/y) of all waste. Similarly, in the commercial sector, plastic waste contributes 9.6% (716 tonnes/y) to all waste.  Plastic waste disposal and leakage  Plastic disposal by weight The most prevalent plastic waste disposed of in Vanuatu (according to polymer type) is made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) (Figure 15). It comprises almost half of commercial waste and almost one-third of household waste. Households generally produce more plastic waste in Vanuatu than commercial premises (Table 10). Due to greater population and possibly better access to more packaged materials in the capital Port Vila, Efate households and businesses dispose of considerably more plastic waste than in Espiritu Santo (Figure 16). Households on Efate generate 723 tonnes per year, while households on Espiritu Santo generate 274 tonnes per year. Commercial premises on Efate generate 597 tonnes per year, while commercial businesses on Espiritu Santo generate 119 tonnes per year. Top 10 plastic items The most common plastic items found in household and commercial waste are soft plastic packaging made of LDPE, ‘Plastic Other (7)’, and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) water bottles, which are considered single-use items (plastic packaging made to be used once) (Table 11). Most other items on the Top 10 list could also be defined as single-use plastics.  *The percentages refer to the proportion of these items in all plastic waste in the sector. A drastic reduction in the production and use of plastics, particularly single-use plastic items and packaging, is the absolute priority when it comes to plastic pollution management. There are multiple ways to avoid the generation of plastic waste, including the following: Diversion of organics from landfill would provide longevity for the landfill and help manage the ‘difficult to manage/non-recyclable’ plastics and other materials.  Gaps and recommendations on plastic and solid waste reduction and management, from upstream to downstream waste management, are presented in below.   Tourism sector – Plastic quantification results The Vanuatu tourism industry is the responsibility of the Department of Tourism (DOT) in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade, Industry and Ni-Vanuatu Business; the responsibility for waste generated by the industry is shared by multiple actors (see Table 12 in Appendix C: Project Methodology – roles and responsibilities). In 2019, the Department of Tourism developed the Sustainable Tourism Policy 2019–2030 with the aim of protecting and celebrating “Vanuatu’s unique environment, culture, kastom and people through sustainable and responsible tourism” (DOT, 2019). The policy also highlights the importance of the awareness campaigns on the ban of plastic straws, polystyrene containers and plastic bags, along with the 3Rs (reduce, reuse, recycle) and waste minimisation efforts, explained in detail in the Vanuatu National Plastics Strategy (2020–2030). The growing marine tourism industry, especially cruise and yacht tourism and the potential environmental hazards associated with it, is highlighted in Vanuatu’s National Ocean Policy, which emphasises the importance of responsible behaviour by individuals and businesses towards the environment. Several legally-binding national documents are also relevant to the tourism industry, such as the Pollution Control Act, Waste Management Act, Port Act, Maritime Act, Ozone Layer Protection Act and Environmental Management and Conservation Act. Vanuatu is a signatory to MARPOL and can accept cruise-ship waste. However, under a regional agreement brokered by SPREP, most ship-generated waste is diverted to Fiji.  The overall quantity of waste disposed of by the tourism industry in Vanuatu was estimated to be around 2,613 tonnes per year. The most prevalent waste category by a large degree is organics, comprising 43.1% of all waste (Figure 21). The second most common category is paper and cardboard (15.2%), followed by metals (13%). Glass (10.4%) and plastics (9.4%) also contribute substantially.  Airline waste disposal was calculated from the number of incoming aircraft and applying the composition and disposal rates reported by Blanca-Alcubilla et al. (2019). From IATA data, there were 1,480 short flights (less than 3 hours in duration) and 1,007 medium-length flights (3–7 hours) to Vanuatu in 2019. Airline waste disposal is estimated to be about 184 tonnes per year, of which 103 tonnes are plastics. Airline waste disposal intensity equals 1.527 kilograms per tourist arrival. Audit results show that land-based tourism waste (2,206.9 tonnes/year) generally outweighs airline (184.2 tonnes/year), cruise-ship waste (216.8 tonnes/year) and yacht waste (4.7 tonnes/year). The most dominant waste type in land tourism waste is organic (48%), in airline waste plastics (56.1%), in cruise-ship waste glass (26%) and in yacht waste organics (30.4%) (Figure 24).  Plastic waste disposal and leakage There are only a few reliable sources for the rate of waste generation (as opposed to disposal) by cruise ships, which makes the amount of waste leakage difficult to estimate. CE Delft 2017 performed audits of waste logs for many vessel classes, including cruise ships, and provided estimates of the volume of waste produced per passenger, although these estimates are imprecise. After accounting for uncertainty in waste disposal from our data and overall generation rates from CE Delft 2017, the median estimate for leakage or incineration of plastics was 51.5%. As it was not possible to obtain a precise figure for the rate of waste generation, our data are consistent with cruise-ship leakage rates anywhere from 0% to 91%. The median estimate of leakage, or incineration, for non-plastic wastes was 20%, with a range of 0% to 91%. For organic wastes, we are highly confident that most generated waste is not offloaded; our leakage or incineration estimate ranges from 90% to 95%. It is important to note that under some circumstances it is permitted to dump organic wastes in the ocean, so it is not surprising that there is very high ‘leakage’ in this category. Composition of disposed plastic waste by polymer across sub-sectors The overall disposal of plastic waste by the tourism sector equals 246.4 tonnes per year. The largest amounts of plastics were disposed of by land-based tourism (111 tonnes/year), closely followed by airline tourism (103 tonnes/year); cruise-ship tourism did not contribute considerably (31 tonnes/year) to the plastics waste stream of the  tourism industry (Figure 23). However, with the knowledge that cruise liners are important producers of plastic waste, these results most likely reflect that Vanuatu’s international ports accept only small amounts of waste from international vessels. As noted earlier, this would suggest plastics are either disposed of at another regional port, incinerated on board the vessel or dumped at sea. Plastic waste disposed of by yachts was 0.8 tonne per year. Regarding the polymer type, PET appears to be the most common material in all four sub-sectors.  Plastic waste leakage Assuming that the leakage of plastics from the tourism sector is comparable to the country’s overall plastic leakage rate, it was estimated that more than 500 tonnes of plastic waste per year are released from the tourism sector (Table 16) into the environment or  are disposed of improperly (burning, burying, etc.).  Plastics and fisheries    Although it is widely accepted that marine plastic pollution predominantly originates from land-based activities (directly and indirectly), marine activities, including petroleum exploration and production, shipping and fishing (lost and discarded gear), also make a considerable contribution (20%). APWC calculates that annual fishing gear imports, including fishing nets, hooks, rods and other gear, is equivalent to 8.9 tonnes, of which 1.2 tonnes are lost at sea annually.  Plastic leaked through abandoned, lost, discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) Richardson et al. (2019) estimated global losses of fishing gear to be 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines every year. According to a review of fisheries observer data (2003–2015) from the western and central Pacific on board purse-seine and longline vessels, more than 10,000 pollution incidents occurred within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of 25 Paciﬁc countries and territories and in international waters (Richardson et al., 2017). Of all dumping incidences by purse seiners, 60% was dumping of plastic waste. Vanuatu longline fisheries had only 56 reported pollution incidents in this period, but due to insufficient observer coverage, this is most likely a considerable underestimate of what truly occurs at sea. Apart from this study, there has been minimal investigation of the types, quantities and fate of plastic waste generated by the fisheries sector in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. ALDFG presents one of the most detrimental marine pollution hazards for marine organisms (Figure 25), and much more attention should be given to this issue (Richardson et al., 2019).  Consumption-based plastic materials other than fishing gear Domestic fishing activities in Vanuatu are same-day, overnight or multiple-day fishing operations. Local artisanal fishermen usually stay out only one day, while larger domestic vessels normally fish for five days, and international vessels up to 14 (longliners) and 28 (purse seiners) days. Plastic items taken on board (other than fishing gear) are related to food and drink consumption. This includes food packaging, such as bags with rice, pasta, sugar, drink powder mix, salt and other seasonings, and plastic bottles containing water, soft drinks and juice. More of these plastic items are taken for multi-day operations. Other materials containing plastic include buckets, life jackets, flares, sounding equipment, raincoats and emergency kits.  I’m a fisherman from Vanuatu, but these days I caught more plastics than fish when fishing.  In late January 2020, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and External Trade released a draft Vanuatu National Plastics Strategy (2020–2030) for comment. One of the tasks included in the draft relates to fisheries and marine pollution: “Reduce the use of single-use plastics by cruise liners and fishing vessels in Vanuatu waters through agreements for plastic free tourism and enhanced fisheries observer programs”. It was estimated the fisheries sector disposed of around 233 tonnes of solid waste annually, of which 66 tonnes are various plastics, making them the most prevalent (28.4%) type of fisheries waste. The second most dominant category are organics (23%) and metals (20%) (Figure 27). Interestingly, a considerable amount of paper, cardboard and cartons is also being disposed of by this sector (18%).  Plastic waste disposal The amount of plastic waste generated by the fisheries sector is 66 tonnes per year. Of this, the most common polymers are PET (36%), PS (21%), followed closely by PP (20%) (Figure 28). Table 20 – Top 10 plastic items – shows that most waste generated by the fisheries sector is not related to fishing activities but to food and beverage consumption. Although not directly linked to marine activities per se (fishing, sailing, petrochemical exploration), when these items are dumped at sea, they should be classified as ocean-based pollution. However, when consumption-related items are recovered during beach and seafloor assessments, they are routinely associated with land activities. This is a good example of how plastic pollution assessments could potentially underestimate the proportion of ocean-based plastic pollution.  Plastic waste leakage Plastic waste leakage in the fisheries sector was calculated in two ways:   Plastic waste leakage based on field data collected as per the audit methodology. This is waste generated by fisher folk when they are undertaking fishing-related activities, from personal use.  Plastic waste leakage desktop study, where leakage calculations are based on assumptions derived from a desktop study literature review (peer reviewed studies from 1978–2021) by Richardson et al. (2019). These estimations are not linked to physical in-country auditing. Plastic leakage from consumer activities If fishing vessels leak plastics at the same rates found in other sectors of the Vanuatu economy, the average annual leakage in 2019 is given in Table 21.  Plastic leakage in the form of fishing gear (ALDFG) The calculations show that in both the Pacific and Caribbean regions overall, nylon material (Other-7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type and gear type is shown in the table below. Each country provided import data linked to customs HS codes related to plastic material in fishing gear. In 2019, the countries in focus imported approximately 195.64 tonnes of fishing gear containing plastic components; Fiji was accountable for 33% of all imports. It is important to note, however, that 19% of the import data is missing (Table 25) as it was not received on request.  Plastic flow analysis Marine plastic pollution   Asari et al. (2019) estimated that PICs contribute 1.3% to 2.7% of the global mismanaged plastic waste, ranging between 156,000 and 327,000 tonnes per year, depending on the scenario. The authors proposed the potential reasons for leakage to be relatively low waste-collection rates in rural areas and high generation rates of plastic waste.  In a recent study assessing the quantities of marine plastics in Vanuatu, almost 10 items were found per metre of beach length on Efate, or 1.2 items per square metre on average (Binetti et al., 2020). The most prevalent type of plastic debris encountered was plastic fragments smaller than 2.5 centimetres (12.1% of all marine debris), plastic fragments between 2.5 and 5 cm (8.3%) and polystyrene fragments (7.2%). In a similar study, in the sediments of Efate beaches, the authors found as many as 33,300 microplastics particles per kilogram of dry sediment (Bakir et al., 2020). In Vanuatu surface waters, the average concentration of plastic particles was 51,144 items per square kilometre, or 0.28 items per cubic metre. Crabs, reef fish and tuna were also examined for the presence of microplastics in their gastrointestinal tracts. Out of 14 crabs examined, 57% contained at least one microplastic. A somewhat lower incidence of plastic ingestion was found in reef fish (35% of 20 individuals contained microplastics). Finally, the greatest frequency of plastic ingestion was found in yellowfin tuna, where five out of six fish examined contained as much as 26 plastic particles.  Plastic waste generation and disposal in Vanuatu General and plastic waste generation and disposal is seemingly low in Vanuatu, particularly in the household and commercial sectors (Figure 29 and Figure 30), which could lead to the conclusion that these sectors are not major sources of plastic leakage in the Pacific. However, this is unlikely, considering the inadequate waste management services in Vanuatu. Waste services are absent in most rural and remote areas, and recycling of plastics is almost non-existent. This means that although the disposal intensity is small, lack of collection services means that a large percentage of the waste generated is leaked. In addition, part of the reason why disposal intensity is small could be because a percentage of waste is not being captured through the collection systems.  The overall plastic waste disposal rate, across all sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries – has been estimated at around 2,026.5 tonnes per year. The household sector disposed of the most plastic waste annually, generating almost 1,000 tonnes per year and 5,543 cubic metres of plastic waste annually (Figure 30). The commercial sector also contributes considerably to the plastic waste stream, at approximately 700 tonnes per year and 3,979 cubic metres of plastic waste annually.  Plastic leakage across sectors  To determine the amount of domestic plastic waste produced each year, customs data for imports of raw plastics, food and drink items and manufactured plastic items was aggregated. For each item imported, the lifespan was estimated as well as the percentage of imported item weight that consisted of plastic. It is this plastic that would potentially end up as waste.  The total waste disposal was found by carrying out visual audits of trucks arriving at Bouffa and Luganville landfills for two weeks to determine the annual volume of waste disposed of. A standard volume-to-weight conversion was applied to this data to determine the annual weight of waste disposed. APWC derived a composition profile of waste from each source from detailed audits of 193 households, 49 commercial premises and a visual survey of 319 trucks entering the landfill. The composition information from the detailed audits of premises was combined with the total quantity from the less detailed truck audits to calculate the total quantity of each type of waste (and plastic) disposed to landfill. different categorisation of plastics in the import and waste stream. The estimate of leakage was based on a Bayesian model, which took as input the total waste generation and imports for each polymer. It was assumed that the true rate of leakage for each polymer was close to the overall leakage rate. A 15% systematic error was assumed for the waste disposal audit figures and a 10% systematic error was assumed for import figures. Sampling error and year-to-year variations were also applied depending on the work undertaken in the country. These assumptions allow the use of overall rate of leakage to provide more credible estimates for each individual polymer. See Appendix H: Bayesian model of tourist waste generation for details of the model. Overall, it is estimated that 58.8% (95% credible interval: 19–82%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from the landfill (Table 27). The high leakage figure in Vanuatu arises primarily because around half of the population of Vanuatu (approximately 140,000 residents) reside on islands with no waste collection service. Plastic leakage per polymer type Material flow analysis of the three sectors shows that more than half of the potentially generated plastic waste leaks into the environment (58%) (Figure 31). Urgent measures are required to address this problem. Of the different polymer types (Figure 32), most plastic leakage belongs to the Other (7) group, which contains materials that are a combination of multiple polymers often known as composite materials, with as much as 77% of these plastics being released into the environment. This also supports the fact that Other (7) category is not highly recyclable and is most likely not being stockpiled for future recycling. Other commonly leaked materials include, surprisingly, HDPE (68%) and PP (65%), as these are highly recyclable materials. This may be explained by the fact that no recycling occurs in Vanuatu.  Since 2018, Vanuatu also banned single-use plastic bags, straws and Styrofoam food containers. A plan to ban disposable nappies is under consideration but was not implemented at the time of the audit.  The 2020 APWC audit found a 90% reduction in lightweight single-use plastic bag usage compared with an audit conducted in 2018 by APWC (Table 29). However, a 2018 JICA audit found that 2% of household waste was single-use shopping bags, straws or polystyrene food containers, while our current audit finds that this is only a fraction of all waste at 0.1%, which is consistent with a 90% reduction in usage across all banned plastics.   Assuming Port Vila waste disposal grows by 2% each year on average and is compacted to 600 kilograms per cubic metre, then 530,000 cubic metres will be occupied already. With no change to waste management practices, 1,000,000 cubic metres will be occupied by the year 2036. Landfill utilisation could be reduced by 55% if glass bottles, plastic bottles, nappies, e-waste and organics were recovered from the waste stream. There are several key issues involved with generation and disposal of solid waste in Vanuatu, including plastic waste. The provision of waste services should be prioritised, including the improvement of existing services in more populated areas and provision of services in rural, remote and less populated areas. Remote communities have access to plastic goods, in particular food packaging, but there is no formalised disposal available. For this reason, dumping, burying and burning remain the most common disposal practices.  Reduction of plastic waste generation is a key priority, as well as recycling the existing waste. The major sources  for plastic leakage identified in Vanuatu include: Animal scattering of plastics Windborne distribution of plastics from the landfill into the surrounding environment Plastic leakage from construction sites Tourism is the dominant industry in Vanuatu and the plastic waste generated by the sector is extensive (Figure 29). Improper disposal of plastic waste degrades the environment and has long-term effects on visitor perceptions. This particularly applies to cruise ships, as it is well established that they produce large amounts of waste. An average cruise ship with a capacity of 2,000 passengers generates about six tonnes of waste per day (3 kg/person/day of waste, APWC, 2019). International ports in Vanuatu do not accept waste (except dry waste in some instances) from international vessels. This affords cruise ships an excuse to dump waste at sea, as has happened in the past (the Princess cruise line was detected dumping waste overboard and consequently fined more than USD 40 million) (NPR, 2021).  Estimating the waste generated, disposed of or dumped in the fisheries sector also presents challenges, as lack of access to records makes it difficult to quantify the extent of the problem. Plastic leakage from fishing vessels occurs regularly, both intentionally and unintentionally. According to fisheries observer data obtained from 2003 to 2015, of all materials dumped overboard, most were plastics (Richardson et al., 2017). The majority of equipment on fishing boats (fishing or maritime) is manufactured using synthetic polymers. Apart from fishing gear, most other items are made from various composite plastics. Food and beverages taken on fishing trips are often packaged in single-use plastics. Items are commonly thrown overboard, often through lack of awareness and lack of enforcement by authorities. Fishing gear can be lost and abandoned in rough sea conditions and is often discarded overboard if no longer of use. APWC recommends strict monitoring of the fisheries industry and potential plastic leakage from these activities. Fisheries observers, video surveillance on board, monitoring of plastics before and after trips, and fishing gear tagging are available measures that should be implemented to reduce the impact of plastic leakage from the fisheries sector. 
