Recyclable materials are mixed in and disposed of in general waste (commingled), with no specific collection of plastics for recycling at Tafaigata Landfill. There is no recycling component at Vaia’ata Landfill but an area to stockpile reusable and recyclable waste. There are no local plastic recyclers in Samoa. One plastic material aggregator – Waste Management Co. Ltd – consistently collects and stockpiles plastics for overseas recycling. The company collects 11.2 tonnes of PET bottles annually through collection cages at supermarkets and schools. As witnessed in other Pacific Island Countries (PICs), significant progress toward plastic recycling in Samoa is constrained, mainly by low trade volumes and diminished international market values. Samoa has taken steps towards reducing the negative impacts of single-use plastic items in the environment. Waste audits during March 2020 confirmed that banned material such as plastic bags and plastic straws remain in community circulation, and therefore it is recommended that subsequent characterisation studies be conducted to understand the effectiveness of the ban in the long term. Households dispose of 0.091 kilograms of waste per resident per day or 6,619 tonnes of waste per year of which 955 tonnes is plastics; commercial businesses dispose of 5,282 tonnes of waste per year of which 1,157 tonnes is plastics. 14.4% of residential waste is plastic, of which 23.7% is PET and 22.6% is LDPE. 21.9 % of commercial waste is plastic, of which 37.1% is PP and 16.6% is PS. Collection services are available on some islands; the quality of service varies and there is a high chance that plastic leakage occurs at the collection stage. Overall, the tourism sector contributes 19.5% of all plastic waste generated in Samoa.  For land tourism, annual plastic disposal is 163 tonnes and leakage is 121 tonnes.  For airlines, annual plastic disposal is 88 tonnes and leakage was 106.5 tonnes.  For cruise ships, annual plastic disposal is 5.9 tonnes and leakage was 6.2 tonnes; incineration of plastics is 51%. For yachts, annual plastic disposal is 0.02 tonnes and leakage is 0.04 tonnes. Plastic represented 11.5% of fisheries waste disposal (1.09 tonnes/year), predominantly PET (55.5%) and PS (33.3%). Plastics disposal contribution per sector The overall plastic disposal rate in Samoa for the period 2019–2020 was 2,370.6 tonnes or 0.01 kilogram per resident per day and 0.04 kilogram per employee per day. Figure 1 outlines the disposal rate in tonnes and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector.  Overall, we estimated that 52.9% (95% credible interval: 22%–78%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Samoa; this equates to 1862 tonnes. Importation and manufacture: Introduce a permit or licence to import approved plastic items (or alternatives) under the Plastic Ban. This controls the number of importers and makes it easier to monitor and collect information from licensed importers as one of the licence conditions. Only imported plastic containers attract a levy and not those manufactured in country. The levy should be extended to in-country manufacturers. Seventy-five per cent (75%) of all the plastic ever made has become waste (WTO, 2020). Plastic waste pollution presents numerous current and future challenges from design, production, consumption and disposal that must be tackled across the entire lifecycle of plastics. To close the global plastic waste pollution gap, with support from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Didier and Martine Primat Foundation, IUCN launched the Plastic Waste Free Islands (PWFI) initiative in 2019, as part of its global Close the Plastic Tap Programme. PWFI is a three-year initiative working in three regions: the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and the Pacific. The initiative’s overarching goal is to drive the circular economy agenda forward and to reduce plastic waste generation and leakage from islands. Most global efforts to mitigate plastic waste and identify leakage sources are focused on mainland countries, with little attention placed on Small Island Developing States (SIDS), whose cultures and economies greatly depend on the wealth of resources provided by oceans. The costs related to plastic pollution and climate-related impacts on SIDS are hugely disproportionate to the contribution of plastics.  Pacific Island Countries (PICs), like other SIDS, are particularly exposed and vulnerable to increased damage from plastic leakage into marine and land-based ecosystems. Marine pollution is now ubiquitous in SIDS, posing a serious threat to the pristine marine ecosystems highly valued for tourism, fisheries and other valuable commodities, and significantly, the health and well-being of Pacific island communities. The health of the ocean is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the lives of the indigenous inhabitants of this region. Addressing marine pollution is an ecological, economic and social priority, particularly in a region extremely susceptible to the impacts of global marine pollution.  Marine plastic litter  Plastics leak into the ocean through a number of channels, including direct dumping of mismanaged or uncollected waste or land dumping that eventually makes its way to the marine environment (61% of total microplastic leakage). Waste collected formally and disposed of in landfill sites is also mismanaged, then entering the marine environment via land, air or illegally dumped into waterways (39% of total microplastic leakage) (Pew Charitable Trust & SystemsIQ, 2020).  In relation to ocean-based sources, a meta-analysis study looked at global fishing gear losses for different major gear types, estimating that 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines are lost around the world each year (Richardson, Hardesty and Wilcox, 2019). A 2016 report predicted that by 2025, for every three tonnes of fish there will be one tonne of plastic waste in the ocean, so by 2050 there will be more plastic than fish in the ocean (World Economic Forum et al., 2016). Plastic leakage  The accumulation of plastic waste in oceans from domestic, industrial and fishing activities is an emerging global issue. The increasing popularity of plastic, combined with low recycling rates, is increasing the amount of plastic leakage into the environment. There are many source points for plastic leakage into the environment, with current global indications placing leakage at 3% or 12 million tonnes per year of the total plastic produced (IUCN, 2020). Project Purpose The purpose of this project is to make a significant and quantified reduction in plastic waste generation and leakage in six SIDS in two ocean regions – the Caribbean (Saint Lucia, Grenada and Antigua and Barbuda) and the Pacific (Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa). Step 1 in the project aims to generate credible data and analysis to understand each country’s current plastic leakage status. This is calculated through a National Level Quantification of Plastic Waste and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in three key sectors: tourism, fisheries, household and commercial and solid waste management. It supports waste reduction on the islands through analysis of entire value chains – from production to disposal – and of plastic usage and wastage across the different sectors. The plastic waste data mapping will track seven materials in an island-wide plastic influx and outflux format (including imports and exports at a national level) to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked per island, per sector. Data collection was supported by a stakeholder assessment, involving comprehensive interviews and discussions with plastic producers, users and other key stakeholders as shown in Figure 2 .  More than 80% of land in Samoa is held under customary ownership and is a key source of identity and security (FAO, 2019). Samoan culture and language are strong and villages tend to be hierarchically organised into tightly-knit communities consisting of several extended families. Samoa’s economic growth is driven by tourism, agriculture, fisheries and trade (IMF, 2018; WTO, 2019), which is supported largely through private remittances from overseas (25% of GDP) and development assistance (10% of GDP) (World Bank, 2019). Services provide 88% of paid employment, including public administration, wholesale and retail trade, transport, accommodation and restaurants. Of Samoa’s total imports, 27% is food such as chicken legs, sugar and mutton. Low-cost and low-quality food imports often displace locally-produced food and contributes to the crisis of non-communicable diseases in the region (World Bank, 2019). The packaging typically associated with highly processed food has implications for this study in terms of plastic packaging. Waste (Plastic Bag) Management Regulations 2018 Waste Management (Importation of waste for electricity and energy recovery) Regulations 2015 – plastic materials ban for manufacturing, exportation, selling or distribution in Samoa, particularly in shopping bags, packing bags and straws. Plastic ban Samoa introduced a plastic ban in 2018 through the Waste (Plastic Bag) Management Regulations (MNRE, 2018), which takes effect over several stages. This regulation prohibits the import, manufacturing or sale of plastic shopping bags, plastic packing bags and straws (from June 2019), and polystyrene (Styrofoam) food containers and cups (from June 2020). Other plastic materials will subsequently follow in the ban, year to year, in a staged process, affording businesses and members of the public adequate time to prepare. Exemptions to the ban are currently granted for food-safety packaging for frozen meat, ice cubes, locally produced chips, kava, local biscuits, such as the traditional savoury keke saina biscuits, and repacked coffee, tea, sugar, flour and cocoa. During 2018, Samoa imported plastic or rubber products/articles from 36 different countries (topped by China, New Zealand, USA, Australia and Fiji) amounting to USD 15 million. For the same period, Samoa’s exports to seven different countries (topped by Australia, New Zealand, Tokelau, American Samoa and Cook Islands) and other nations was USD 1.4 million (World Bank, 2020).  Plastic producers  At present, 22 plastic producers operate within Samoa, of which 12 produce a bottle product for packaging beverages such as water, soft drinks and beer. Four companies blow their own bottles, four companies source preform material from China, a fifth company sources from multiple overseas suppliers, and one local source collects. Seven of these companies provide a water refill service. They sell larger bottles of water ranging from four litres to 25 litres and provide both household and commercial business customers with a refill service for these bottles on return. These refill service providers allow the customers not only to seek a refill of their own empty bottles but bottles from other companies can also be refilled by any service provider. This practice should be encouraged in order to reduce PET consumption in the future.  Plastic recyclers There are no local plastic recyclers in Samoa. One plastic material aggregator – Waste Management Co. Ltd – consistently collects and stockpiles plastics for overseas recycling. The company has reportedly collected 11.2 tonnes of PET bottles in 2018–2019 through cages at supermarkets and schools.  This lack of significant progress towards plastic recycling in Samoa is mirrored in other PICs, mainly as the result of low trade volumes and low international market values. Other pilot projects and initiatives have collected plastic bottles in the past; however, these are often stockpiled within Samoa. Plastic litter  The contribution of regional PICs to the global total of mismanaged plastic waste has been estimated to range from 1.3% to 2.7% (Asari et al., 2019). Other studies indicate the total amount of ocean plastic waste in and around PICs to be about 1% of the total amount produced by the top 20 mismanaged plastic waste-producing countries (Jambeck et al., 2015). A recent survey on plastic ingestion by fish in the South Pacific region indicated that a quarter to half of the fish species surveyed had plastic in their digestive tracts, with an average plastic load of 2.4 plastic particles per fish. In Samoa, higher ingestion rates were generally found in carnivorous predators, such as yellowfin tuna and ambon emperor, than in herbivorous fish. Plastic was also found in prey, which suggests a transfer of microplastics through the food chain (Markic et al., 2018). Recyclable materials are mixed in and disposed of as general waste, with no specific collection of plastics for recycling at the landfill itself (see section on Plastic recyclers). Ten to 20 waste pickers operating at the site recover scrap metal and bulky waste items. Waste pickers sell to recycling companies, which then export the material in shipping containers off the island for resale. In collaboration with Japanese Technical Cooperation Project for Promotion of Regional Initiative on Solid Waste Management (JPRISM II), SRWMA is in the planning stages of a pilot project to trial plastic-to-concrete, plastic pelletising and flaking. As part of the project, both the Pacific Recycle Co. Ltd and Waste Management Co. Ltd have commenced the recovery of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles through the use of recycling cages located at supermarkets, schools and other locations within the urban areas.  As the key members of SRWMA, both Waste Management and Pacific Recycle are also exploring options for the export of baled PET bottles to Australian and Asian markets. However, no positive developments have been made in this area, as the shipment of baled plastics is not economically viable despite free shipment provided by Swire Shipping Company.  Ongoing discussions among Samoa Pure Water, Tragic Plastics and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) involve converting all types of plastics to concrete. This was under discussion at the time of writing this report.   In 2019, Samoa’s government indicated its support for introducing relevant economic instruments (e.g. CDL, ARF, ADF) to promote the recovery of recyclable waste materials for recycling purposes, as well as appropriate treatment and disposal of non-recyclable waste including hazardous waste (waste oil, etc). The PacWaste Plus Project is supporting Samoa with the development of the ARF. A feasibility study was conducted in 2020 and a set of recommendations has been presented to MNRE for feedback. The proposed ARF covers beverage drinks, metal, plastic packaging and other goods. Several waste-to-energy (WtE) projects were proposed to the government by a number of overseas companies with local partners, but none has come to fruition. It has proven to be difficult to implement this type of technology in Samoa and other PICs. One of the projects involved the import of tyres and other waste materials from overseas, but it has encountered several challenges. The stockpiles of tyres and plastics at Tafaigata were noted during this assessment. Household and commercial sector – Plastic quantification results Each household can dispose of an unlimited amount of waste and there is no segregation of recyclable material (plastics, glass, paper and cardboard) or organic waste prior to collection from households or commercial businesses. All waste is stored for collection on a raised platform (stand) to keep scavenging animals at bay (Figure 7), compacted on collection and dumped at the landfill. The results of interviews with Samoan residents and commercial property managers demonstrate that most of their waste is usually collected by the local waste service providers (Figure 9). Only 3.9% of household organic waste is dumped on land and 2% of the general commercial waste is burned. It is not known how the 8% of nappies in household waste is disposed of, but potentially it is being dumped in the environment. Most plastic waste is collected; however, 1.9% of household plastics and 1.4% of commercial plastics have not been specified.  Interviewees shared their household waste disposal practices, where 98% of general waste and plastic waste is collected by MNRE, as well as 91% of nappies, 41% of food, 25% of green waste and 49% of bulky waste. The other method for disposal of bulky waste is through a special collection service. This collection system also includes 1% of general waste.  Auditors queried households about their willingness to purchase bags for disposing of recyclables such as plastic bottles, cans, glass, metal and cardboard for collection on a weekly basis. Eighty-four per cent (84%) or 131 households would be willing to purchase recycling bags, 12% or 19 households said they would not be willing to purchase a bag for recycling purposes. The remaining 4% did not provide a response to the question. Commercial premises also differ in the way they dispose of green, general and plastic waste. Forty-eight per cent (48%) or 19 businesses did not clarify where they dispose of their green waste, while 5% or two premises stated they dumped it on land, 3% or one business stated they buried it. In 2020, the overall household and commercial waste disposal rate in Samoa equalled 11,901 tonnes per year (T/y). Regarding composition, the dominant category was paper and cardboard (31.9%) (Figure 13). The second most common material category was plastics, contributing (17.7%), followed by hygiene products (12.7%) and organics (11.9%), which consisted mainly of food scraps, plant material from gardening, old baskets and other biodegradable natural material. It should be noted that many of the hygiene products, textiles, e-waste and construction materials are either entirely or partially composed of synthetic polymers, meaning that the proportion of plastics in Samoan household and commercial waste is in fact greater than 18%. However, to ensure that the analysis was accurate for pure polymer types, these categories were kept separate from the other plastics. For a more detailed breakdown of all categories, please see Appendix D: Material type and sort form.  Disposal rates are considerably higher in the household sector than in the commercial sector, which relates to there being more residential than commercial properties in Samoa. It was estimated that households dispose of 6,619 tonnes of waste annually, while the commercial sector disposes of 5,282 tonnes per year. Unsurprisingly, households produce more hygiene and organic waste than commercial premises (22.1% and 1%, and 18.7%, and 3.3%, respectively) (Figure 14). For commercial premises, more than half of the waste stream consisted of paper and cardboard (52.1%), which is significant in terms of the potential to reduce pressure on landfill space through recycling and composting. Plastics are also an important component of the commercial waste (21.9%).  Plastic waste disposal and leakage In Samoa, commercial premises generally produce more plastic waste than households (Table 8). Commercial plastic waste (1,157.3 tonnes/year) contributes 48.8% to all plastic waste disposed of in Samoa. Households generate 945.5 tonnes of plastic waste per year, plastics comprising 14.4% of all household waste.  According to the polymer type, the composition of the household plastic waste is quite different from the composition of the commercial waste. The most prevalent plastic waste disposed of by households are PET (23.7%), LDPE (22.6%) and HDPE (19.1%), while the commercial sector mainly disposed of PP (37.1%) and PS ((Figure 15). Large quantities of PP (429.2 tonnes/year) in the commercial sector indicate a potentially high use of single-use plastics. Due to greater population, more access to materials and better access to collection services in the capital, Savai’i households and businesses dispose of considerably more plastic waste than in Upolu (Figure 16). Top 10 plastic items Of all plastic items found in household and commercial waste, the most common is wrap cling foil made of LDPE (4), with almost 20% of household plastics composed of plastic cling wrap (cling film) (Table 9). Also featuring high on the list are PET (1) water bottles for households, which are considered single-use items (this type of plastic packaging was made to be used once). Commercial premises produce a considerably high quantity of single-use plastics (SUPs), particularly cling wrap foil made of LDPE, polystyrene (PS 6), various PP plastics and foamed PS packaging.  Note: The percentages refer to the proportion of these items in all plastic waste in the sector. Considering the results of the 2020 waste audit for the top 10 plastic items, recommendations could focus on educating households on the use of non-plastic alternatives to cling-wrap film. For commercial premises, focus could be directed towards the restaurant industry to encourage reducing the high use of single-use plastics in the takeaway food industry. For both sectors, reducing the quantity of single-use plastics for water bottles could be achieved through incentivising water bottle refilling and dis-incentivising water sales in smaller bottle sizes such as 250-millilitre, 300-millilitre and 500-milllilitre containers. Leakage of plastics from the household and commercial sector in Samoa is quite high. In fact, we estimated that households leak more plastic than they dispose of, and mainly of various polymer types (Other – 7), which could also potentially be explained by the fact that these polymers are generally non-recyclable (Table 10).  The audit identified several key gaps when focusing on the management of plastic waste in the solid waste management sector, as outlined in Table 11. A majority of interviewees (29%) reported that waste collections were conducted on a daily basis, 24% that collections occurred twice a week and 18% that collection occurred every three days. Only one respondent stated that they had collections once a week and another stated that waste was collected on an ad hoc basis. Seven or 41% of accommodation establishments reported glass waste material is separated for recycling, with only one stating that plastic bottles are also separated and delivered to Apia for recycling. There was no correlation between the number of staff employed or the accommodation size and the frequency of collections.   APWC 2020 audit interviews with tourism operators suggest that both plastic and general ship-generated waste are mainly saved for collection at the port. Almost 18% of the organic waste is dumped overboard by sea tourism (Figure 25). Anecdotally, there is no evidence of source separation in the kitchen bins on board ships. This means that most packaging material that is placed in kitchen bins also is dumped at sea.  The overall quantity of waste disposed of by the tourism industry in Samoa was estimated to be around 2,892 tonnes per year. The most prevalent waste category by far is organics, comprising 51.4% of all waste (Figure 27). The second most common category is paper and cardboard including liquid paperboard (19.4%), followed by metals (11.7%) and plastics (8.9%).  Land-based tourism was calculated based on the total amount of waste disposed of by the various types of accommodations audited by APWC consultants, as well as the total disposal at the landfill. Land-based tourism waste is estimated to be 2,293 tonnes per year, of which 163 tonnes or 7% is plastic. It accounts for 15% of all waste and 7% of all plastic waste generated in Samoa. Organics are by far the highest quantities of waste disposed of (58%).  Airline waste disposal was calculated from the number of incoming aircraft and applying the composition and disposal rates reported by Blanca-Alcubilla et al. (2019). From IATA data, there were 1,117 short international flights and 457 regional flights of less than three hours in 2019. Airline waste disposal is estimated to be about 555 tonnes per year, of which 88 tonnes are plastics. Airline waste disposal intensity equals 3.2 kilograms per arrival.  In Samoa, cruise vessels dispose of 44 tonnes per year of waste of which 6 tonnes is plastic. CE Delft 2017 reported waste generation rates on non-passenger ships of up to 10 times greater than passenger ships. For both food waste and non-plastic domestic waste, the passenger ship average was around 1.5 times the lower bound, while they did not give a specific number for passenger ship plastic generation. We supposed that plastics generation was again around 1.5 times the lower bound given in the report, which was substantially lower than the mean value given. Even with this lower value, their data indicated more plastic generation than our visual composition audits suggest. Most waste categories dominate in the land-based tourism subsector, while plastics comprise a large part of airline tourism waste and ash is common in cruise-ship tourism waste (Figure 29). Cruise ships are also responsible for disposing of most of the e-waste and hygiene waste recorded in this sector.  Plastic waste disposal and leakage Plastic waste composition by polymer across subsectors The overall disposal of plastic waste by the tourism sector equals 258 tonnes per year. The largest amounts of plastics were disposed of by the land-based tourism subsector (163 T/y), closely followed by airline tourism (88 T/y), while cruise-ship tourism did not contribute considerably (6 T/y) to the plastics waste stream (Figure 31).  However, knowing that cruise liners are important producers of plastic waste, these results more likely reflect Samoa’s acceptance of only small amounts of waste from international vessels at ports. As noted earlier, this would mean that the plastics are either disposed of at another regional port, incinerated on board the vessel or dumped at sea. Regarding the polymer type, PET (1) seems to be the most common material in all three subsectors followed by Plastic Other (7), which represents packaging materials. Top 10 plastic items The top 10 items in land-based tourism are presented in Table 14. Most of the items in the top 10 plastic waste discarded by land-based tourism are single-use PET water bottles and plastic cling film, representing more than half of all waste disposed from hotels in Samoa.  Leakage of plastics from the tourism sector is considerably lower than from the household and commercial sector (Table 15). Most commonly released into the environment or held in stockpiles are plastics of various polymers (Other –7), usually non-recyclable.  Pollution from fishing vessels in the WCPO is a serious problem, particularly from purse-seine vessels. It was estimated that 71% of the purse-seine pollution incidents were documented as waste dumped overboard, and only 13% as ALDFG (Richardson et al., 2017). Of the ‘waste dumped’ overboard, 60% was found to be plastics (Figure 36). Samoa was ranked approximately 16 out of 26 countries for reported pollution incidents between 2003–2015.  Plastic materials other than fishing gear A majority of domestic fishing vessels in Samoa engaged in same-day or overnight fishing operations, with operators taking subsistence items such as food, water and drink containers on board. Vessels engaged in multi-day operations are more likely to take plastic items such as food packaging (for example, bags with rice, pasta, sugar, drink mix, salt and other seasonings) and food, water and drink containers. Other plastic-containing materials include buckets, life jackets, flares and sounding equipment. Apia Port was one of five ports included in a study supporting the development of a plan for a Regional Ship Waste Reception Centre (SPREP, 2014b). The study reported that Apia Port accepted fishing vessel general garbage and garbage for recycling, both of which were reported as being trucked to landfill. Fishing gear, which was subject to quarantine, was also accepted but its fate was unrecorded (SPREP, 2014b). There is no data available for the fate of plastic discarded by fishing vessels using Apia Port (MRAG, 2021). In the APWC 2020 audit, all interviewees reported that plastic waste generated whist at sea is captured in a plastic bag and returned to port for disposal at the landfill. Interestingly 41% of those interviewed noted that they bring their general waste back for collection whilst 55% dump their general waste in the water. The disposal practices for food waste differed, whereby 54% of respondents suggested that food waste is captured and returned to port, while 41% admitted to dumping food waste into the water and another 5% to burying food waste generated while on board fishing vessels.  Interestingly, the highest amount of waste being disposed of by the fishermen is paper, cardboard and carton (57.8%), which accounted for over half of the waste from the 2020 audit (Figure 41). This is followed by organic waste at 19%. Plastics make up the third highest percentage of waste (11.5%) disposed of by fishing boats, of which 6.4% is PET. Plastic disposal and leakage  The amount of plastic waste generated by the fisheries sector (personal use by fisher folk) in Samoa is 1.1 tonnes per year (Table 22). It is important to note that this is in large part because all international fishing waste is classed as quarantine and incinerated. Of this, the most common polymer types are PET (56.5%), PS (33.3%) and HDPE (9.8 %) (Figure 42).  Top plastic items – consumption based The top plastic items table shows that most waste generated by the fisheries sector is not related to fishing activities, but to consumption of food and beverages (Table 23). When these items are dumped at sea, they should be classified as ocean-based pollution, even though they are not directly linked to marine activities per se (fishing, sailing, petrochemical exploration). However, it is a practice that consumption-related items recovered in beach, seafloor and surface water assessments are associated with land activities. This is a good example of how plastic pollution assessments could potentially underestimate the proportion of ocean-based plastic pollution, as opposed to the land-based.  Plastic waste leakage – consumption based The material composition and weight of each gear type was applied to the potential leakage rates of fishing gear as per Table 25 to ascertain the potential leakage rates per country of interest based on the polymer composition. The calculations assume that in both the Pacific and Caribbean regions overall, nylon material (Other – 7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type by country and gear type is shown below. Each country provided import data linked to HS codes related to plastic material in fishing gear as shown below.  The domestic Samoa fishing fleet comprises approximately 69 vessels, or 0.002% of the world’s 3.7 million-vessel fleet (Rosseau et al., 2019). Hull scrapings from anti-fouling coatings or composite hull materials lost through wear and cleaning are recognised as a source of microplastic pollution in the ocean. Sundt, Schulze and Syversen (2014) estimate that Norwegian recreational vessels emit around 0.5 kilogram of microplastics per annum. As domestic fishing vessels in Samoa may be larger on average than recreational vessels, it can be estimated that they might shed 1 kilogram per vessel per year. Overall, we estimate with considerable uncertainty, that the Samoa fishing fleet sheds 69 kilograms per year of microplastics. Plastic flow analysis  Marine plastic pollution Asari et al. (2019) estimated that PICs contribute to the global mismanaged plastic waste with 1.3% to 2.7%, ranging between 156,000 and 327,000 tonnes per year, depending on the scenario. The authors proposed the potential reasons for leakage to be relatively low waste collection rates in rural areas and high generation rates of plastic waste.  Plastic waste disposal in Samoa  The overall plastic waste disposal rate across all the sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries – has been estimated at around 2,371 tonnes per year.  Plastic waste disposal in the household sector is the highest annually, generating almost 1,157 tonnes and 6,430 cubic metres of plastic waste annually (Figure 44). The commercial sector also contributes considerably to the plastic waste stream.  General and plastic waste generation and disposal is seemingly low in Samoa, particularly in the household and commercial sector (Figure 45), possibly indicating that the sector is not a major source of plastic leakage in the Pacific. However, due to inadequate waste management services, it might not be quite so. Waste services are not provided at all in most of the rural and remote areas, and recycling of plastics is almost entirely lacking in Samoa. Plastic recycling is generally not very efficient in resource recovery on a global scale, but does present a temporary storing solution for future recycling.  Samoa has a significantly different plastics fingerprint across sectors, which highlights the need to address each sector separately.  Plastic leakage across sectors  To determine the amount of domestic plastic waste produced each year, customs data was aggregated for imports of raw plastics, food and drink items, and manufactured plastic items. Lifespan and percentage of the weight were estimated for each plastic item imported that could end up as waste. Different categorisation of plastics in the import and waste streams Our estimate of leakage was based on a Bayesian model that took as input total waste generation and imports for each polymer. It was assumed that the true rate of leakage for each polymer was somewhat close to the overall leakage rate, and that waste disposal and import figures may have a 10% systematic error in addition to sampling error and year-to-year variation. In addition, we allowed for misclassification errors in both import and disposal data. Misclassification error can arise because it is difficult to determine the polymer of some plastic products during sorting (plastic film, for example, can be made of many different polymers). Overall, we estimated that 57.8% (22–86%) of all plastics imported to Samoa are leaked or held in informal dumpsites. This high rate of leakage reflects the low coverage of households by collection services. See Appendix I for details of the model.  plastic polymer types for all sectors, Samoa Plastic waste generated on board aircraft, cruise ships and by overnight tourists represents 15% of Samoa’s overall plastic waste generation, if leakage occurs identically across all sectors. In comparison, tourism represents 24% of Samoa’s gross national product (GNP). Plastics waste management  On average, 56% of all plastic material imported into Samoa is managed by sending waste material to landfill post-consumer use. Polypropylene (PP) waste has the highest landfill rate at 89%, whereas polyvinyl chloride (PVC) waste material has the lowest rate landfilled at 1%. As expected, leakage rates directly correlate with the percentage of material managed through landfilling. Materials with high landfill rates have lower leakage rates and materials with lower landfill rates have higher leakage rates. For example, PVC material has a leakage rate of 99%, whereas the PS leakage rate is 11%. Presently, PET is the only polymer type captured within formal recycling systems in Samoa. The recycling rate of this material accounts for just 0.25% of all plastic products imported annually into the country and 2% of all PET material imported during the same period.  Overall plastic leakage (1–7) This section investigates the amount of plastic waste leaked into the environment in Samoa across the seven plastic polymer types. The flow of plastic material entering Samoa originates from two sources, although the overwhelming majority of material (99.7%) is derived from plastic imports. The remaining 0.3% is attributed to waste from cruise ships offloading in county. Overall, just over half of the total plastic waste generated in Samoa is managed through landfilling, less than 1% is exported and 44% is leaked into the environment. The only plastic material recycled in Samoa is PET. Impact of current plastic bag and polystyrene container ban Samoa has taken steps towards reducing the negative impacts of single-use plastic items on the environment by prohibiting the import, manufacture or sale of plastic shopping bags, plastic packaging bags and plastic straws. The ban was implemented in July 2019 followed by the addition of polystyrene (Styrofoam) food containers and cups in July 2020, as outlined in the Waste (Plastic Bag) Management Regulations.  Audit data suggest that single-use plastic bags account for 165 tonnes of waste disposed of at Tafaigata Landfill annually. This includes bags generated by both the municipal and tourism sectors.  As several banned single-use plastic items were still present in the waste stream, it is recommended that subsequent characterisation studies should be conducted to understand the effectiveness of the ban in the long term. Samoa is expected to expand waste deposit regulations in the near future, and it is anticipated that this may include plastic waste materials such as beverage containers, therefore increasing the recovery of clean plastic waste material. Long-term governmental subsidies could be integrated within the proposed Waste Deposit Regulation design. Sort data indicates that PET beverage bottles accounted for 56% of all PET waste, while PET beauty and personal care bottles contributed an additional 0.7%. HDPE beverage bottles accounted for 7% of HDPE waste, while HDPE beauty and personal care bottles alone account for an additional 21% of HDPE and HDPE household products another 39%. These materials could be successfully captured through a cash-for-deposit scheme administered by container deposit legislation (CDL) based on similar models successfully implemented in other SIDS. Recovering only recyclable PET, HDPE, glass and cans and banning single-use plastic bags extends the life by around two years. At present, a limited amount of plastic material is collected for recycling purposes in Samoa. A number of viable opportunities are already available to address the quantities of valuable plastic material ending up in Samoa’s landfills. 1)  Samoa could use an opportunity to undertake local reprocessing of plastic material, such a washing and flaking. Producing a reprocessed product such as flaked PET could assist in accessing better export markets. This could also assist Samoa in meeting the stricter measures for recyclable plastic exports that have been added to the Basel Convention. 2) Samoa would greatly improve the quality of recovered plastic with cleaner material by introducing the anticipated waste deposit regulations in the near future (which should include beverage containers). Furthermore, long-term governmental subsidies could be integrated within the proposed waste deposit regulation design.  3) Plastic-to-product initiatives that recycle waste materials such as PET bottles into products are also a viable option. Waste deposit legislation will increase the amount of clean material available. There are many opportunities that would make an investment in this area worthwhile. Numerous upcoming plastics-to-products technologies such as roofing materials, concrete and road sealing materials could possibly work for Samoa. Members of the SRWMA and other businesses currently investing in waste recycling would be best positioned to invest in these programmes in conjunction with ongoing support from the Samoan Government. If such a project is to be considered, a feasibility study is recommended to thoroughly investigate, identify, address and overcome current challenges such as shipment to overseas markets and the potential leakage of microplastics when such products are used. The recent introduction of a single-use plastic ban has shown some promising outcomes, with the gradual disappearance of one common litter item – the plastic shopping bag. Local businesses and consumers are gradually adjusting to and accepting the initiative.  A clearly defined path for plastic waste generation to disposal could not be adequately established, as unknown quantities of plastic are leaked into the environment through illegal dumping, littering and burning, especially in rural areas. Uncertainty also arises from the actual quantity of collected plastic waste reported by existing recyclers. In addition, current legislative provisions are inadequate, specifically for waste generation and management activities by the tourism and fisheries industries.  Samoa’s private recycling sector is more developed than in other PICs and Caribbean SIDS and forms a solid foundation to further expand and develop plastic waste recycling practices. The lack of feasible plastic recycling operations, both in country and off-island, is partly due to low international and national economic values and returns. A regional recycling arrangement would be necessary in order to recycle at scale. One such arrangement currently exists between the island of Tokelau and Samoa for aluminium can recycling. Materials from Tokelau are shipped to Samoa and then consolidated with Samoa’s waste cans to fill a shipping container, expediting the operation and rendering it more economically viable (SPREP, 2016).  Existing and appropriate economic instruments and arrangements are necessary to support plastic collection and recovery for recycling in Samoa, including the promotion of waste minimisation across all sectors, subsidies for recycling operational costs and appropriate facilities for final disposal.  National CDL system on high-value plastic – to recover potential recyclable waste items and to avoid other waste disposal into the environment. Legislation in the tourism industry to minimise single-use plastics, reduce waste – compulsory water refilling and water filter stations in large hotels and resorts could reduce the large number of single-use 300-millilitre and 500-millilitre water bottles provided to guests on a daily basis. Financial disincentives for plastic imports – the introduction of levies on the import of plastic bottles and plastic bottle preforms for the large number of water-bottling companies in Samoa. Large for-profit businesses, including airlines, hotels and resorts, are not required to separate or recycle the substantial quantities of plastic waste brought into Samoa for international tourist services. No legislation, policies or strategies require the tourism industry to minimise the amount of single-use plastics used on a daily basis.  While Samoa’s national solid waste system may not have capacity for kerbside recycling at households at this time, the tourism industry should be able to implement separation of recyclable materials at large hotels, resorts and airlines. Linking sustainable waste management practices to hotel licensing could assist the government in introducing regulations. If there is to be positive change in the future, tourism bodies and private sector associations such as the Samoa Tourism Authority (STA) and the Samoa Hotel Association should engage more closely with plastic waste challenges in the sector.
