Annual Report 2021
 Introduction 2021 saw increasing recognition that the biodiversity and climate challenges are two sides of the same coin – we cannot address the climate crisis without also halting and reversing the loss of biodiversity. The eyes of the world were on Glasgow for the COP26 climate summit, where nature was part of the climate discussions more than ever before. Leading organisations around the world are recognising the importance of managing nature-related risks and opportunities alongside climate risk.

You can’t manage what you can’t measure, and for over a decade IBAT has provided access to biodiversity data in an integrated and intuitive fashion, helping users to assess biodiversity related risk. The World Database on Protected Areas, the World Database of Key Biodiversity Areas, and the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species are three of the most globally authoritative biodiversity datasets, and play a crucial role in informing conservation and private sector decision-making.

In recognition of the crucial role that businesses can play in reducing biodiversity loss, many are increasingly moving beyond just assessing biodiversity related risk and seeking to identify opportunities to become more nature positive.
It is into this evolving landscape that IBAT launched STAR – the Species Threat Abatement and Restoration metric. Released at the IUCN World Conservation Congress in Marseille, STAR allows businesses to quantify their contribution to reducing global species extinction risk.

As organisations seek to align with global biodiversity goals and set science-based targets for nature, STAR is a powerful new tool to help guide nature positive action. – Edward Ellis, IBAT Manager

Background
IBAT is a web-based map and reporting tool that provides fast, easy and integrated access to three of the world’s most authoritative global biodiversity datasets:

IBAT is developed and maintained by the IBAT Alliance (BirdLife International, Conservation International, UN Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP‑WCMC), and IUCN) with the aim to enable users to make informed decisions in policy and practice.

The IBAT team are based at the David Attenborough Building, a vibrant hub for leading conservation organisations.

“Our common vision is that decisions affecting critical biodiversity should be informed by the best and most up to date scientific information and the decision‑makers who use that information should help support its
generation and maintenance” – IBAT Alliance Partners

STAR 10,000 Users

The most significant and exciting development to IBAT during 2021 was the launch of the Species Threat Abatement and Restoration Metric (STAR) at the IUCN World Conservation Congress in September. Following the publication of the STAR methodology in Nature, the IBAT team worked hard to deliver the STAR Metric in a user-friendly and accessible way, in line with business needs. This development work resulted in the release of three STAR-related functionalities in IBAT:

During 2021, IBAT’s user base reached 10,000 users – and growing! This explosive growth in users has tracked the increase in awareness about the biodiversity crisis by businesses and the recognition of the need to act. This increased growth can also be attributed to new initiatives like the launch of the Taskforce on Nature‑related Financial Disclosures (TNFD) beta framework, and implementation of the Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR) ESG disclosure requirements, as well as the increasing need for transparency in corporate sustainability reporting.

1. STAR Data Map. IBAT’s data map is a popular tool for high-level visual screening and context. The global STAR layer was added to the map and is visible at a granularity of 5km2 for subscribers, while the global layer is downloadable for use in GIS analysis.
2. STAR Report. A brand-new report was developed, emulating IBAT’s traditional project-level screening options and delivering comprehensive information on the opportunities to reduce species extinction risk and which threats to mitigate to deliver maximum impact.
3. STAR Multi-site assessment. Companies are increasingly conducting corporate biodiversity assessments at scale, and it was important that organisations could access insights on STAR across global assets. The integration of STAR with our Multi-site Report has allowed IBAT users to identify opportunities for positive biodiversity action by quickly ranking their sites based on total and mean STAR scores.
The STAR Metric was developed at a crucial point in time as businesses are increasingly required to demonstrate positive biodiversity actions, as well as set science-based targets. STAR now enables businesses to avoid the addition of cumulative impacts to species and to quantify what contributions they can make to reducing threats to species.
STAR was first launched in beta to enable businesses to provide feedback and shape the future development of the metric. We
saw rapid uptake and interest in STAR, with valuable feedback from a number of IBAT subscribers, as well as first‑time users of the tool. The STAR beta will continue into 2022.

New Staff
In 2021, the IBAT Secretariat grew from strength-to-strength.
We welcomed three new staff to support the growth and
delivery of IBAT. Masum Hussain joined us as IBAT’s new
Finance & Administrative Officer, taking over from Nikita Ellis
who after 3 dedicated years with IBAT, has moved on to
other responsibilities within BirdLife International. Masum
joined IBAT from a software consultancy, where he also
managed finance and administrative responsibilities, as well
as managing key account customer projects and building a
digital marketing strategy. Later in 2021, we also welcomed
Miguel Torres as IBAT’s new Technical Officer – leading the
technical development of the tool. Miguel joined us with a
wealth of development experience as a software engineer
having delivered health data insights, public transport Wi-Fi
and even having worked at UNEP‑WCMC using GIS for land
use planning. Miguel is supported by Ayushi Rathore, our new
Web Developer. Ayushi is based in India and joins us with
years of experience in software development using Ruby on
Rails. Additional technical capacity was provided by Jono
Feist and Stanley Liu from UNEP‑WCMC, who delivered many
improvements and new functionalities to the IBAT platform.

Users on the IBAT platform. A 63% increase since 2020.

One of IBAT’s most popular functionalities
is our biodiversity data report delivered as a
package that includes a PDF document, raw
data in CSV format, and map files. Our report
templates include a biodiversity Proximity
Report, a World Bank Group risk report
(IFC PS6 – WB ESS6), a Freshwater Report,
a STAR Report and a Multi-site Report see sample downloads.

User stories

IBAT has always put users at the heart of its development.
It was initially co-developed with private sector users to
support early stage biodiversity risk screening, for example
screening against World Bank Group’s biodiversity
performance standards. This remains one of the core
applications of the tool but it is now also used in a range of
circumstances and by a wide set of users including the Asian
Development Bank, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank,
Evonik, IFC, International Olympic Committee, and Olam.

Finnfund
"Our investments are required to comply with
the IFC (International Finance Corporation)
Performance Standard 6 and as a European
DFI, we are committed to ensuring biodiversity
protection and conservation. In this regard,
IBAT has become a crucial tool during
our screening phase on biodiversity.
Our team of Environmental and Social Advisers
have utilised the tool to screen projects in different
sectors and regions with various levels of risks
and impacts. I work with forestry and renewable
energy projects, and the tool gives me a quick
visual overview of the potential risks and probable
red flags in terms of biodiversity and ecosystem
services. IBAT also allows me to integrate my
analysis with other GIS tools, which increases
the depth of my scrutiny. We are looking forward
to utilising the new STAR functionality!".
– Harold Gordillo Manager, Senior Environmental
and Social Adviser, Finnfund

GSK

FMO
"IBAT is applied at an early stage of FMO’s
investment process, during its first selection
of clients. The tool provides the development
bank guidance to inform its decisions
and is used as a basic risk screening on
biodiversity to provide a first overview on IUCN
Red List of Threatened Species, Protected
Areas, and Key Biodiversity Areas.
When it is found, for instance, that a project site
encroaches an area that is home to a diverse
and unique range of species and ecosystems...
FMO may decide not to proceed with the

evaluation of the opportunity, in line with FMO’s
exclusion list and applicable ESG requirements
outlined in its public Sustainability policy.
However, if risks and impacts can be managed
in line with FMO’s ESG risk appetite, IBAT results
are taken along during the next stage of the
investment process... FMO’s ESG specialists
would then continue to use IBAT as a monitoring
tool throughout the lifetime of the investment to
ensure that biodiversity risks are continuously and

GSK is a science-led healthcare company with
a special purpose to improve the quality of
human life. “We believe that global efforts are
needed to stop activities that drive biodiversity
loss, to reduce the exploitation of high
biodiversity regions, to conserve protected
areas and to mitigate climate impact.
IBAT provides essential screening on threatened
species and endangered habitats that
helps us assess risks, focus accompanying
investigations, and prioritise restoration

correctly categorized, assessed, and mitigated."

activities at our operating sites globally.”

– Published in PBAF 2022

– Marguerite Murray, Biodiversity Lead, GSK

Allianz Group
Allianz Group is one of the world’s largest financial
service providers offering property and casualty
(P&C) insurance, life/health insurance and
asset management. Integration of sustainability
in our underwriting and investment activities
across the above-mentioned segments has
been a long-standing priority for Allianz.
Since 2012, Allianz has continuously worked
on implementing processes to manage
sustainability-related risks across our business.
This included introducing guidelines for the
management of such risks across our P&C
insurance and non-listed investment (real estate,
infrastructure, renewables, etc.) transactions.

Karijini National Park, Australia
World Database on Protected Areas

When an underwriter or investment manager
identifies a potential risk based on one of our
sustainability guidelines, the transaction is
referred for review by one of our sustainability
centres of competence. These teams then assess
the biodiversity impacts of insurance clients
or of potential investment targets (mainly in
the alternative assets space, i.e. infrastructure
investments, real estate, renewable energy) on
their local environment. For this, the teams need to
understand threatened species, protected areas,
and other indicators of biodiversity. Should certain
risks be identified, they will be evaluated and may

lead to us adding conditions to our insurance
offers or investment proposals to mitigate such
a risk or to decline a transaction if we do not see
viable mitigation options. IBAT is one of several
tools we use, however it is the only geo-location
based tool for biodiversity-related information.
It is mainly used for insurance and investment
transactions with direct physical locations (such
as a wind farm, or other infrastructure projects).
As the topic of biodiversity increases in
importance across the financial services
sector, we are also using IBAT for portfoliolevel analyses of biodiversity-related risks.
Allianz France, recently published the
results of their biodiversity risk assessment
performed on their investment portfolio in
their Sustainable Investment Report 2021.
The underlying data for the analysis was
in part based on IBAT’s GIS data for Key
Biodiversity Areas and the IUCN Red List.
As the insurance and investment worlds
are increasing our digitization efforts,
we also see opportunities for further
integration of IBAT data into our insurance,
reinsurance, and investment GIS systems.
– Nico Ahn, Senior Manager, Global Sustainability at Allianz

Bringing
data to life
Described by our users as “a must for
any project on biodiversity conservation”,
IBAT offers a ‘one-stop shop’ data search
service for those seeking authoritative
global biodiversity information. IBAT
subscriptions, in turn, help update
and maintain these datasets.

IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species™

World Database on
Protected Areas

World Database of
Key Biodiversity Areas

Andringitra National Park, Madagascar
World Database on Protected Areas
World Database of Key Biodiversity Areas

World Database on
Protected Areas
The World Database on
Protected Areas (WDPA)
is the authoritative source
of data on protected
areas, and is updated on a
monthly basis. Since 2019,
it has been accompanied
by a companion database
on other effective
area‑based conservation
measures (OECMs).

The WDPA is a joint product between UNEP and
IUCN, and is managed by UNEP-WCMC. The team
works continuously with representatives from
governments, communities and collaborative
partners, as well as international convention
secretariats. The WDPA and World Database on
OECMs are key components of the Protected
Planet initiative, which is the most authoritative
global platform providing the world’s decision
makers and the community of practitioners
with the best possible information, knowledge
and tools for understanding protected and
conserved areas at national and global levels.

Progress to date in coverage of protected areas

The funding provided by the IBAT Alliance
in 2020, alongside contributions from other
sources, enabled the WDPA to form the basis
of the Protected Planet Report 2020: the final
report card on progress towards the global
10‑year target on protected and conserved
areas which aimed to bring important benefits
to both biodiversity and people by 2020.
In 2021, the IBAT Alliance income enabled
the Protected Planet Initiative to build on
this success through the improvement and
updating of protected and conserved area data.
Approximately 67% of WDPA and World Database
on OECM records were updated or added in 2021.

As of December 2021, 22.7 million km² (16.80%)
of land and inland water ecosystems and
29.0 million km² (8.01%) of coastal waters
and the ocean were within documented
protected and conserved areas. A new target
for protected and conserved areas will be
agreed at the UN Biodiversity Conference in
December 2022, and funding from the IBAT
Alliance will support UNEP-WCMC in tracking
progress towards this target up to 2030.

World Database of
Key Biodiversity Areas
The World Database of Key
Biodiversity Areas (WDKBA)
compiles the data on all sites
of significance for the global
persistence of biodiversity.
It is managed by BirdLife International on
behalf of the KBA Partnership, a consortium
of 13 of the world’s leading conservation
organisations. Sites are identified nationally
through inclusive processes involving all relevant
stakeholders. The criteria used to identify KBAs
focus on five aspects of biodiversity value:
1. Threatened species/ecosystems
2. Species/ecosystems with restricted ranges
3. Intact sites with minimal human impact
4. Biological processes such as
congregations of species
5. Sites of high irreplaceability
The total number of confirmed KBAs has now
reached 16,356, covering more than 20 million
km² of land and sea. These sites have been
identified as important for 13,762 species that
‘trigger’ KBA criteria. In 2021, 138 new KBAs
were confirmed in the database, while many
others were updated or had their documentation
improved, including correcting minor delineation
errors. Birds comprise 44% of species for which
KBAs have been identified, while the proportions
of plant and amphibian trigger species have
increased (reaching 25% and 10% respectively).

By the end of 2021, KBA National Coordination
Groups (KBA NCGs) had been established in 14
countries to update national KBA inventories
and identify new KBAs, with 13 additional
countries in the process of establishing KBA
NCGs. For example, the Canadian KBA NCG
is currently undertaking a comprehensive
assessment of KBAs across all the territories
of Canada assessing multiple taxonomic
groups of species, as well as ecosystems.
Meanwhile, South Africa is in the process of
completing its major assessment of KBAs across
thousands of species (in multiple taxonomic
groups) and hundreds of ecosystem types.
With the support of funding from the Garfield
Weston Foundation to BirdLife International,
work started in 2021 on redevelopment of the
WDKBA. This makes it easier to identify new

KBAs, update assessments of existing KBAs,
and document why each site is important for
biodiversity. It also supports more effective
collaboration on KBA proposals, streamlines the
review, approval, and confirmation processes,
and underpins more effective provision of access
to the KBA dataset, particularly through IBAT.
In 2021 we also improved access to the data
by redesigning the online dashboard on the
KBA website, enabling users to apply more
sophisticated queries to the dataset and
generate statistics on the species triggering
KBAs, their threats and habitats, as well as
the protected area coverage of KBAs.
In 2021, KBAs received considerable profile
during the negotiations on the Global Biodiversity
Framework though the Convention on Biological

Diversity. There is a growing momentum behind
a target to conserving 30% of land and seas by
2030 under this framework. KBAs provide the
best tool to identify areas of importance for
biodiversity on which to focus site conservation
efforts (e.g. designation and management of
protected areas), because of the standardized
and quantitative approach to KBA identification,
and the existence of a global network of KBAs.
The coverage of KBAs by protected areas is an
existing indicator for Sustainable Development
Goals 14 and 15 and has been identified by
the CBD as an indicator for tracking progress
towards the Global Biodiversity Framework.

IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species
More than 40,080 species
are threatened with extinction
That is 28% of all assessed species.

The IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species
is the world’s most
comprehensive information
source on the global
conservation status of
animal, fungi and plant
species and their links
to human livelihoods.
It is a powerful tool to inform and catalyse
action for biodiversity conservation through
policy change and action on the ground. The
IUCN Red List evaluates the extinction risk of
thousands of species, using nine categories;
Critically Endangered (CR), Endangered (EN)
and Vulnerable (VU) species are considered
to be threatened with extinction.
Data from the IUCN Red List is of international
importance and is used to track progress
towards UN Sustainable Development
Goal 15 – Life on Land. It is anticipated
that the implementation of a new post2020 international framework for saving
nature will hinge on the availability and
performance of the IUCN Red List.

Resources generated by IBAT are provided
to the IUCN Red List Partnership
(iucnredlist.org/about/partners) to
support three key priority areas:
1. The expansion of the IUCN Red List to
make it more representative of life on earth.
2. Regular reviews of species already on the
IUCN Red List so that changes in the status
and taxonomy of species are incorporated.
3. Ensure the IUCN Red List website and
database are underpinned by appropriate
technologies.
In 2021 we added 13,762 new entries to
the IUCN Red List. These included 8,037
plants because of the focus on completing
the global tree assessment. We also
conducted re-assessments of 3,083 species
– bringing the total number of global species
assessments processed in 2021 to 16,845.
Funds raised by IBAT in 2021 are being used to
support the expansion and update of freshwater
species, invertebrates, reptiles, birds, mammals,
amphibians and plants. Funds also helped
support improvements in internal processes
for handling spatial data, for generating new
species richness maps for amphibians, birds
and mammals, and improvements to the IUCN
Red List website, including changes to make
assessments more visible to search engines
like Google Scholar and the incorporation of
the first 26 Green Status species assessments
assessing the potential of species to recover.

2021 financial report

IBAT subscriptions directly
support the update and
maintenance of three of the
world’s most authoritative
global datasets: the World
Database on Protected
Areas, the World Database
of Key Biodiversity Areas,
and the IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species.

2021 EXPENDITURE

2021 subscription income

The annual cost of updating
and maintaining these
datasets is estimated at
US$6.5 million. An additional
US$114 million will be
needed to reach baselines
of data coverage for global
biodiversity and conservation
knowledge products.

TOTAL (includes PAYG @ USD 149,654)

36.0% Support to data sets

29.4% Web presence

1.1% Miscellaneous

13.2% Communications and
audience engagement

20.3% Governance, management
& coordination


2021 expenses
1,787,005 USD

Support to management, maintenance and interpretation of core IBAT data sets 411,459

Web presence 336,587

Governance, management and coordination (IBAT staff, support to IBAT from Alliance) 232,476

Communications and audience engagement 151,795

Miscellaneous (office equipment, legal, other) 12,388

TOTAL USD 1,144,705

What next?

There is exciting momentum
leading into 2022. The
long‑awaited UN Biodiversity
Conference, COP15, will
bring together governments
from around the world to
agree to a new set of goals
for nature over the next
decade through the post2020 Global Biodiversity
Framework. There are calls
from across the business
community for governments
to adopt ambitious nature
policies to reverse nature
loss this decade.

IBAT will be matching this ambition, with the
adoption of a new strategy to guide IBAT through
these crucial next 5 years for nature. With a
focus on innovation and impact, IBAT will look to
provide actionable and operational biodiversity
insights to help organisations achieve nature
positive outcomes. Through collaborations with
organisations across the public and private
sector, we will seek to expand both the reach
and influence of authoritative biodiversity data.
Nature continues to be lost at an alarming rate,
and the decisions made over the coming years will
be crucial in halting and reversing biodiversity loss.
Globally authoritative datasets have an important
role to play, both in guiding decisions and tracking
our collective progress. The funding generated
through IBAT is crucial in helping to update and
maintain the World Database on Protected Areas,
the World Database of Key Biodiversity Areas,
and the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
We would like to thank all our subscribers for
their support, which is greatly appreciated.

