IUCN is pleased to acknowledge the support of the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) of the Plastic Waste Free Island Project Grant Number GLO-0841 QZA-18/0336 The Plastic Waste National Level Quantification and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in Saint Lucia was compiled as a key element of the research study commissioned by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in January 2020 – Plastic Waste Free Islands Project. Leakage for the purpose of this study (plastic leakage) is the unaccounted waste that is calculated by the difference between material imported and waste disposed of. This is because all plastic enters the island through imports and not through local production. Any material that has reached the end of its life and has not been transported to a managed landfill or recycling facility is leakage; for example, it may have been littered, dumped at an informal landfill or stored privately. For the purposes of this study, Leakage = (material produced + material imported) – (material recycled + material stockpiled + waste disposed of). Leakage numbers have been modelled, and the methodological principles behind the modelling can be located in the appendix. Plastic producers include those manufacturing plastic items and those producing items using manufactured plastic products (e.g. blowing preforms for beverages). Single-use plastics (SUPs) are plastics that are intended to be used only once. For the purposes of this study, SUPs have been separated by polymer type. A breakdown of the quantities of SUPs appears in the appendix. This study considers only material flow analysis of plastic material from the  Asia Pacific Waste Consultants (APWC) were engaged by IUCN in 2020 to undertake a National Level Quantification of Plastic Waste and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in three key sectors: household and commercial, tourism and fisheries as stage one of the Plastic Waste Free Islands Project. The plastic waste data mapping has tracked seven plastic materials in an island-wide plastic influx and outflux format (including imports and exports at a national level) to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked per sector in Saint Lucia. Data has also been collected to provide an overall picture of the waste management landscape for Saint Lucia to provide a robust and comprehensive overview of the plastic flows. Overall, the economies of scale in Saint Lucia do not allow for major impetus towards waste recycling, mainly because the volume of available recyclable material is limited. However, there are a number of recyclers sustainably collecting, processing and exporting plastics for recycling. Any future initiatives should work with these existing recyclers.  Saint Lucia has implemented legislation in an effort to transition away from single-use plastic materials. The audit findings suggest that compliance rates have proved the success of the bans, yet there is a significant gap in capturing and successfully managing other recyclable material such plastic PET, HDPE containers and organics.  In order to support the use of plastic alternatives, the Government of Saint Lucia is working towards a nil (0%) or reduced import duty for biodegradable and compostable food-service containers. Households dispose of 0.44 kilogram of waste per resident per day or 29,310 tonnes of waste per year, of which 3,412 tonnes is plastics; commercial businesses dispose of 39,411 tonnes of waste per year, of which 945 tonnes is plastics.21% of household  plastic waste was nappies (diapers); 23% of households disposed of nappies (diapers) through the SLSWMA collection system, but 76% did not clarify how they disposed of them. This should be investigated. Overall, the tourism sector contributes to 14% of all plastic waste generated in Saint Lucia. Plastic disposal contribution per sector The overall plastic disposal rate in Saint Lucia for the period 2019–2020 was 5,071 tonnes per year or 0.076 kilogram per resident per day. Figure 2 outlines the disposal rate in tonnes and disposal percentage share by polymer type per sector.  Figure 2:	 Plastic waste disposal rates in the four sectors of interest in Saint Lucia, in tonnes/year Plastic leakage  Overall, it is estimated that 14% (95% credible interval: 2%–24%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs away from landfill in Saint Lucia; this equates to 836 (132–1391) tonnes.  Seventy-five per cent (75%) of all the plastic ever made has become waste (WTO, 2020). Plastic waste pollution presents numerous current and future challenges from design, production, consumption and disposal that must be tackled across the entire lifecycle of plastics. In 2019, with support from the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) and the Didier and Martine Primat Foundation, IUCN launched the Plastic Waste Free Islands (PWFI) initiative to close the global plastic waste pollution gap as part of its global Close the Plastic Tap Programme. PWFI is a three-year initiative working in three regions: the Caribbean, the Mediterranean and in the Pacific. The initiative’s overarching goal is to drive the circular economy agenda forward and to reduce plastic waste generation and leakage from islands. Most global efforts to mitigate plastic waste and identify leakage sources are focused on mainland countries, with little attention placed on Small Island Developing States (SIDS), whose cultures and economies greatly depend on the wealth of resources provided by oceans. The costs related to plastic pollution and climate-related impacts on SIDS are hugely disproportionate to the contribution of plastics.  Caribbean islands are particularly exposed and vulnerable to increased damage from plastic leakage into marine and land-based ecosystems. Marine pollution is now ubiquitous in SIDS, posing a serious threat to the pristine marine ecosystems highly valued for tourism, fisheries and other valuable commodities, including the health and well-being of island communities. Addressing marine pollution is an ecological, economic and social priority, particularly in a region extremely susceptible to the impacts of global marine pollution. The health of the ocean is intrinsically and inextricably linked to the lives of the indigenous inhabitants of this region. Marine plastic litter  Plastics leak into the ocean through a number of channels, including direct dumping of mismanaged or uncollected waste or land dumping that eventually makes its way to the marine environment (61% of total microplastic leakage). Waste collected formally and disposed of at landfill sites is also mismanaged, entering via land, air or illegally dumped into water (Pew Charitable Trust and SystemsIQ, 2020).  In relation to ocean-based sources of plastic pollution, a meta-analysis study investigated global fishing-gear losses for different major gear types, estimating that 5.7% of all fishing nets, 8.6% of all traps and 29% of all lines are lost worldwide each year (Richardson, Hardesty and Wilcox, 2019). A 2016 report predicted that by 2025 for every three tonnes of fish there would be one tonne of plastic waste in the ocean; therefore, by 2050, there will be more plastic than fish in the ocean (World Economic Forum et al., 2016). Plastic leakage  The accumulation of plastic waste in oceans from domestic, industrial and fishing activities is an emerging global issue. The increasing popularity of plastic, combined with low recycling rates, is increasing the amount of plastic leakage into the environment, with current global indications placing leakage at 3% or 12 million tonnes per year of total plastic produced (IUCN, 2020).  The purpose of this project is to make a significant and quantified reduction in plastic waste disposal and leakage in six SIDS in two ocean regions – the Caribbean (Saint Lucia, Grenada, and Antigua and Barbuda) and the Pacific (Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa). The project aims to generate credible data and analysis to understand each country’s current plastic leakage status. This is calculated through a National Level Quantification of Plastic Waste and Sectorial Material Flow Analysis in three key sectors: tourism, fisheries, household and commercial and solid waste management. It supports waste reduction on the islands through analysis of entire value chains – from production to disposal – and of plastic usage and wastage across the different sectors. The plastic waste data mapping will track seven materials in an island-wide plastic influx and outflux format (including imports and exports at a national level) to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked per island, per sector. Data collection was supported by a stakeholder assessment, involving comprehensive interviews and discussions with plastic producers, users and other key stakeholders, as shown in Figure 1 below. This report presents the plastics flow analysis and leakage analysis for Saint Lucia. Saint Lucia imports ten times as much as it exports (USD 1,614 million compared to USD 148 million), including 60% of all food (FAO, 2015; Government of Saint Lucia, 2019a), most of which is transported in plastic and paper packaging. Saint Lucia has an unemployment rate of 17%, with a high youth unemployment rate of 36% (Central Office of Saint Lucia, 2019).  A Returnable Containers Act that would incentivise the return of plastic containers in exchange for the payment of a cash refund was drafted in 2008. It was not enacted or passed (Ministry of Sustainable Development, 2016).  Plastic bans As part of the #Cleanseas campaign to combat  marine litter in 2017, Saint Lucia made commitments that led to the ban on polystyrene (Styrofoam) and plastic food-service containers.  In August 2019, the ban commenced initially focusing on the importation of polystyrene (Styrofoam) containers, followed by the full ban on the sale and use of these products by 2020 and a ban on plastic products in 2021. This phased approach allowed the public to understand and become accustomed to the ban, and retailers and distributers to exhaust their existing stocks of polystyrene plastic food containers and source alternatives (Government of Saint Lucia, 2019b). In UNEP’s 2018 Status of Styrofoam and Plastic Bags Ban report, a number of recommendations were made by the Cabinet. Included in the ban are PS, PET and HDPE takeaway beverage cups, all plastic takeaway plates, PS and PET cup lids, bowls (not HDPE); PS bowls, trays, tray covers, fruit and vegetable, meat and fish trays, hinged takeaway containers (not PET or HDPE).  In order to support the use of plastic alternatives, the government of Saint Lucia is working towards a zero (0%) or reduced import duty for biodegradable and compostable food-service containers. The Department of Sustainable Development is currently working on establishing these concessions by product type (for example, cups or food container bowls) and working with Saint Lucia Bureau of Standards for a product-approval process. To import an alternative plastic product will require the product to be first evaluated by the bureau; once approved, the importer must approach the Department of Sustainability for the import licence and import duty concession. While these concessions are currently being worked on, there are no clearly defined timelines and completion dates have not been communicated to private sector associations (SLHTA, 2020). Styrofoam and Plastics Food Service Containers (Prohibition) Act 2019 – plastics ban.  Environmental Protection Levy Act (2005) – sets a levy (1.5% of the costs, insurance and freight (CIF) value) on goods imported, including products such as tyres, motor vehicles, white goods, goods in glass/plastic/cardboard containers and empty containers. During 2017, Saint Lucia imported plastic or rubber products/articles from 74 different countries (topped by the United States, China, and Trinidad and Tobago), amounting to USD 31 million. Exports for the same period to 29 identified countries in the world was USD 3 million (World Bank, 2017). The annual overall plastic import for 2019 was 6,208 tonnes (Customs and Excise Department, Saint Lucia, 2020). FAO suggests that Saint Lucia imports approximately 60–65% of the total food and beverages consumed by weight.  Plastic producers  Approximately nine companies utilise plastic pellets to produce plastic bottles, containers and/or bags, as well as manufacture packaging. The only exception is Plastic Solutions Ltd., which produces plastic bags for sale to other local retailers, such as bakeries (see Appendix C: Project methodology for a detailed table of producers and products). Plastic champions There are a number of social enterprises, public institutions and agencies, private businesses and civil society organisations that establish, finance or participate in plastic pollution amelioration. Initiatives range from pilot and sporadic projects for the collection of recyclable materials to establishing permanent source-separation systems. Refer to Appendix C: Project methodology for details on plastic champions. Most recyclers in Saint Lucia focus on scrap metal and waste streams of the highest value. By contrast, plastics have high collection and reprocessing costs (sorting, cleaning and compacting). However, most recyclers do accept plastics as part of recovery services, or when an opportunity presents itself, to capture a high volume of plastic material, for example, the closure of a factory (JUA KALI, 2020). In addition, Greening the Caribbean is a licensed waste hauler that collects waste from different commercial premises and provides the option of installing waste-to-landfill minimisation stations to its commercial clients. The process of recycling plastics is partially funded by the cost of the station installation and segregated collection, which allows the posterior processing of plastic waste to be financially viable.  The only components of e-waste recycled in Saint Lucia are from computers, which are manually dismantled using screwdrivers, hammers and drills, to separate plastic from electronic boards (Figure 4) – the rest is shipped whole overseas. However, general e-waste represents a small part of the recycling business, less than 5% of the overall recycling in Saint Lucia (ITU, 2017).  Plastic litter The concentration of plastic litter found in marine and coastal environments, however, is disproportionally high with an average of 2,014 items of litter per kilometre when compared to a global average of 573 items per kilometre. The most common single-use plastic was plastic bottles, comprising 21% of the items recorded (Diez et al., 2019).  The following chapters focus on the waste management, tourism and fisheries sectors in Saint Lucia, identifying sources of plastic leakage through analysing plastic influx and outflux mapping to identify sources, quantities and pathways of plastic waste generated and leaked. The APWC audit suggests that annually 3,412 tonnes of plastic material from household waste will serve as feedstock to the pyrolysis machines, as recyclables are not currently separated at source.  Plastic waste initiatives A number of plastic and waste reduction initiatives in Saint Lucia are noted below. Each aims to improve waste management practices, improve recycling and reduce leakage. APWC recommends that the findings of these projects should be considered in any future project design.   Households typically collect their garbage in plastic bags, which are either placed directly on the kerbside for collection, on a tree or fence, or in a bin or tree at a household property boundary. In communities where the topography is mountainous or in dense housing schemes with limited access to waste-hauling vehicles, waste is disposed of in a communal bin or designated collection point. Recycling in Saint Lucia is very limited. There is no separation at source of recyclable materials (plastics, glass, paper and cardboard) or organic waste prior to collection from households or commercial businesses. Some businesses have segregated disposal stations and segregated collection through Greening the Caribbean. Waste is currently compacted on collection and dumped at the landfill. A limited amount of scrap metal material (from bulky waste) and e-waste collection occurs at the entrance to Deglos Landfill (see section Deglos Sanitary Landfill), however no waste pickers or recycling activities are allowed to occur at the tip face. Lead-acid batteries are collected for export, and waste oil is collected and reused, for example by private companies such as Saint Lucia Linen Services and Saint Lucia Distillers for creating bio-fuel to operate their machinery.  Information on limited plastic recycling for export in Saint Lucia is in the section, Recyclers and stockpiles. Ninety-eight per cent (98%) of households disposed of plastic material in the general waste for collection. One interviewee reported disposing of plastics via a special collection to the Deglos Sanitary Landfill and 1% or three households reported plastic waste was burned. Nappies were disposed of by 23% of households through the SLSWMA collection system, but 76% did not clarify the disposal method. The overall average rating for the household waste management service was 3.86 out of 5, citing that collectors were on time and households were satisfied with their work. One-third of respondents noted that collections were not completed on time; 13% mentioned that bins are overflowing; 5% said that SLSWMA contractors ”do not pick up all the trash, so if animals arrive, they make a mess”; 5% mentioned there are not enough collection days; and one interviewee said the truck did not always collect in their area. All of these comments describe possible sources of waste leakage, in particular plastic leakage. Risk of leakage is considerably higher when there are collection delays, particularly when garbage bags are placed directly on the street. Bags are vandalised or opened by scavenging animals, releasing durable and light plastics such as PET bottles and PP chip packets into the surrounding environment, storm drains and waterways. For plastics specifically, 92% of premises properly disposed of their plastic waste in the general waste collection, while 8% burned their plastic waste. On further investigation, one out of two rural towns interviewed, and one out of four small regional towns interviewed, indicated their plastic waste was burned. One of these was an agricultural supplies business, and therefore was likely burning HDPE plastic containers that previously contained chemical products. In 2020, household and commercial properties disposed of 68,721 tonnes of waste. Of this, 6.3% (4,356 tonnes) was plastic waste contributing 85.9% of the overall plastic disposal for Saint Lucia (Figure 19). Organic waste, including food and green waste, biodegradable plastic and compostable material accounted for the largest amount of waste disposal (44.1%) (Figure 19). The second most common material category is paper and cardboard, contributing 13.5% and construction waste (cement, tiles, clean fill, plasterboard and rocks) (12%), followed by metals, including aluminium (9.9%). It is worth noting that many hygiene products, textiles, e-waste and construction materials are either partially or entirely composed of synthetic polymers, meaning the proportion of plastics in Saint Lucia’s household and commercial waste is in fact greater than 6.3%. However, to ensure that the analysis was accurate for pure polymer types, these categories were kept separate from the other plastics. For a more detailed breakdown of all categories, see Appendix D: Material types and sort form. Of all waste disposed of by the sector, the audit data indicates that households dispose of 43% and commercial businesses 57%. Figure 20 below shows household waste is composed of 11.6% plastics while commercial waste is 2.4% plastics. Households contribute 3.5 times more plastic waste than commercial businesses. Commercial businesses disposed of larger amounts of metals, construction, rubber, end of life vehicles, hygiene, textiles and organics. Commercial businesses dispose of more organic waste than households, yet the total disposal breakdown represents 51.8% of household waste and 38.5% of commercial waste.  Plastic disposal and leakage Plastic disposal by weight According to audit data, the most prevalent polymer disposed of by the sector comprises Plastic Other (7), accounting for 41.2% of all household and a quarter of commercial business plastic disposal. Examples of Other (7) plastic material found during the audit includes single-use soft plastic, multi-layered food packaging materials and other multi-layered plastic containers. PET (1) disposal by households and commercial businesses was very similar; a large majority were beverage containers. HDPE (2) material comprising items such as personal care product bottles and single-use garbage and shopping bags was the third largest plastic disposed of by households. However, materials derived from PP (5) were the third most popular plastic disposed of by commercial businesses.   The contribution of each plastic polymer to households and commercial waste in Saint Lucia is presented in Table 9 and Figure 21 below. The most common plastic items found in household and commercial waste are beverage containers made from PET (1), accounting for 23% and 22.5% of all household and commercial plastic disposal, respectively.  Single-use plastic materials dominate the top 10 plastic items for both household and commercial businesses, including packaging material, garbage bags and shopping bags. Despite a ban on disposable plastic containers for the sale of food and an import ban on disposable plastic cutlery (that was due to commence in mid-2020 but placed on hold until August 2022 due to challenges and hindrances to trade caused by the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic), these items appeared in great numbers in the top 10 list. The items shown in Table 10 account for 68.4% of all plastic disposal by households and 71.1% of plastics disposed of by commercial businesses in Saint Lucia. Plastic leakage  Overall, APWC estimates Saint Lucia leaked 836 tonnes per year of plastic with a 95% Bayesian credible interval (BCI) of 132–1,391 tonnes/year (2%–23%). This amounted to an overall leakage rate of 14% (95% BCI of 2–23%). Individual polymer leakage rates were highly uncertain and ranged from 11% for PET (1) (95% BCI 0–27%) and 42% for LDPE (4) (95% BCI 0–82 %). Assuming household and commercial leakage rates were equal to the best estimate of the national average, households accounted for 60% or 0.008 kilogram per person per day and commercial businesses 16% or 0.004 kilogram per employee per day to the overall plastic leakage in Saint Lucia.  Audit data indicates the polymer most likely to be leaked by households and commercial businesses is Other (7) plastic, followed by PET (1) for households and LDPE (4) for commercial businesses. PET is lightweight material and is therefore easily transported by wind and water when not disposed of responsibly or when a dumpsite is not well managed (for example, without perimeter fencing). This model for leakage considers any item that has not been managed correctly through disposal, reuse or recycling after a certain life in circulation.  Given that PET is one of the main items lost to the environment, the implementation of a container-related initiative, such as a CDL, could place a value on plastic PET bottles and prevent leakage, while also encouraging members of the public to collect PET bottles leaked to the environment.  The audit identified several key gaps when focusing on management of plastic waste in the solid waste management sector, as outlined in Table 12 below. The impact of tourism waste can be seen through UNEP’s analysis, which identified two hotspots as having the greatest impact on waste in the tourism sector in Saint Lucia. First, solid waste generated by hotels and restaurants accounts for 8% of national waste (increasing at a rate of 5% a year since 2008 according to the SLSWMA). No source separation or recycling takes place and all commingled waste is landfilled (some exceptions). Second, single-use items used in hotels and restaurants have not yet been banned, specifically plastic packaging, water bottles, cups, drinking straws. These items create litter and increase marine pollution (UNEP, 2019b). According to a study analysing hotspots in the tourism value chain, ”… at present, there is no information available on the importation of food, goods and consumables into the country for the tourism sector specifically” (UNEP, 2019b). Massy Stores is the largest and most dominant supplier of food on the island, however the Sandals chain has set up a subsidiary company to provide food and beverage services to the accommodation and restaurant sector. Some small enterprises have collaborated to meet tourism needs, forming cooperatives to supply the hotel sector, with volumes and number of contracts ‘unknown’ (UNEP, 2019b). This supply chain in Saint Lucia’s tourism sector could present a potential opportunity through which to implement systemic change to decrease use of single-use plastics and recycling systems. The SLHTA and its industry members fully supported the plastic ban announcement and indicated its concern about plastic waste, strengthening its commitment to collaborate with government and other public and private stakeholders to implement the ban (SLHTA, 2018). The SLHTA advocated for the duty-free importation of plastic substitute utensils and eco-friendly packaging alternatives to mitigate the higher cost associated with plastic reduction – see section on Plastic bans for more details. In total, there are 5,078 rooms, 2.6 million ‘bed nights’ and an average occupancy rate of 66% (UNEP, 2019b) in Saint Lucia. Of the total rooms available, 33% are part of a branded hotel (dominated by hotel chain Sandals) and all-inclusive hotel packages. Large hotels account for 72% of the room stock, with small hotels at 14%; villas and apartments at 10%; and guesthouses at 4% (UNEP, 2019a). Consequently, the large hotels and resorts are the largest waste generators in the tourism industry and therefore represent the greatest potential for reductions in plastic waste. In 2019, Saint Lucia received 423,736 air tourists staying an average of eight nights, which is a growth of 9% in the past three years since 2017 (Ministry of Finance and Economic Growth, 2020). This growth in air-based tourism also comes with increased pressure to dispose of high volumes of plastic and general waste from airlines. International aircraft waste is accepted in Saint Lucia and is the responsibility of the SLASPA. Airlines pay for the cost of disposal through a standing airport charge collected by SLASPA. There are currently no waste management plans at Saint Lucia’s airports and no separation of recyclables, including plastics. The SLASPA does not keep records of waste received or disposal.  Both airports have the same waste disposal process. Aircraft waste is collected (no separation) with airport waste in large bins. Hewanorra has three small affixed bins located on the airside to receive passenger/crew/worker waste items during boarding and disembarking, for example luggage tags, plastic bags and broken zips found on the parking ramp or in the walkway; there are small bins located around the landside. SLASPA staff clear bins on a daily basis into a skip bin at each airport. Hewanorra has six large bins and a skip bin for waste storage; George F.L Charles Airport has one skip bin only. Waste from airlines is offloaded from aircraft and collected by a private waste hauler twice a week. This commingled waste is sent to landfill where it is deep-buried. Banned items intercepted at Customs, including counterfeit currency, narcotics, flick knives and blades, are considered quarantine waste and are encapsulated and deep-buried.  Saint Lucia’s yachting centre is IGY Rodney Bay Marina with full facilities for 253 berths and 32 super-yacht berths. Slips can be booked in advance online and service includes waste disposal at designated locations on the jetty. Bins are available 24 hours, seven days a week, with dockside pick-up daily between 6 am and 3 pm. Bins are reported to be 60% full on average and 100% full during the high season. Waste streams are placed in the appropriate labelled section of the concrete depot structure, containing four 18,122-litre receptacles for paper/cardboard, e-waste, aluminium cans and bottles (plastic and glass) and general waste.  All interviews reported that all plastic waste is offloaded at the port and taken to landfill. One of the yachts berthed at the Rodney Bay Marina mentioned lack of trust in the segregation system – ”glass and metal is collected but I am told it is still put in landfills”. This suggests it is important not only to provide recycling bins but also to communicate how and where the recycling materials are taken to ensure that all yachts tourists segregate their waste when that option is made available. Twenty per cent (20%) of interviewees reported food waste was dropped into the ocean and 80% reported it was offloaded at the port. The composition of the waste discharged from 53 vessels was mostly comprised of dry garbage, incinerator ash, cardboard, ground glass and plastics. Used waste oil is also accepted from cruise ships in Saint Lucia and has been recognised by the government as requiring proper management, in other words, the reduction in the number of oil-spill incidences. (Government of Saint Lucia, 2011).Sea ports During the period 2019 to 2020, the tourism sector generated 8,849 tonnes of waste. Of this, 704 tonnes were plastic waste, contributing 8% of the overall waste disposal by the tourism sector. Organics, including biodegradable material, accounted for 44.5% of the total waste disposed of by the sector (Figure 29); paper and cardboard (including LPB) accounted for 15.6% and glass contributed 15.9%.  The SLSWMA reports that an average of 5,441 tonnes per year was disposed of by hotels during the period 2015–2019. This equates to 1.6 kilograms per tourist per day, which is substantially higher than the Saint Lucia household generation rate (0.43 kg/person/day). Land-based tourists disposed of 294 tonnes per year of plastic waste, representing 41.7% of all plastic waste disposed of by the tourism sector annually, equivalent to 0.08 kilogram per tourist per day.  The largest contributor to land-based plastic waste was Plastic Other (7) material (which included items such as multi-layered food and beverage and single-use plastics) at 42.8%, followed by PET (1) (which included items such as water bottles and other drink bottles) at 19.8%.  In addition to the generation of general and plastic waste, tourists also contribute indirectly to the generation of sewage, bulky and construction waste through the operation of tourism-related businesses, although these waste streams typically contain much less plastic than municipal solid waste. Tourists overall spent 3.4 million nights in Saint Lucia during 2018, compared with roughly 66 million person-nights spent by residents. Therefore, it could be estimated that tourists contribute indirectly to the generation of 5% of sewage, bulky and construction waste. These figures were combined with composition data to estimate the generation rate of each category of material. Airline waste disposal data suggests that short- and long-haul flights generate 90.8 tonnes of waste per year. Again, the largest material disposed of was organics, at 45 tonnes or 49% per year. Airlines are currently exempt from Saint Lucia’s polystyrene ban, with aircraft producing 7.8% of the total polystyrene disposal by the tourism sector, although this only represents 2.1% or 1.95 tonnes of all airline waste per year. Airlines account for the smallest share of total plastic waste when compared with other tourism activities, generating 10.7 tonnes or 1.5% of the total tourism plastic waste per year. There are few reliable sources for the rate of waste generation (as opposed to disposal) by cruise ships, which makes it difficult to estimate the amount of waste leaked. CE Delft 2017 audited the waste logs of many ships, including cruise ships, and provided estimates of the volume of waste produced per passenger, although these estimates are imprecise. After accounting for uncertainty in waste disposal from our data and overall generation rates from CE Delft 2017, the amount of waste offloaded annually accounted for all of the generation given the median estimate from Delft. There is a large degree of uncertainty with this estimate, and the figures do not rule out leakage rates as high as 80% for plastics and 83% for waste excluding plastic and organics. As it was not possible to obtain a precise figure for the rate of waste generation, data are consistent with cruise-ship leakage rates anywhere from 0% to 80%, with a median estimate of 0%. There is high confidence that most generated organic waste is not offloaded; our leakage or incineration estimate ranges from 87% to 94%. Note that under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), dumping of all plastics into the sea is banned, at any distance from land. Other products such as paper, rugs, glass, metals, bottles, crockery, lining and packaging can be legally discharged at 25 miles (40 km) from shore (IMO, 2019). However, no discharge of any type of waste is permitted in ‘special areas’ or bodies of water deemed to require additional protection, such as the entire Caribbean. In these areas, only food waste can be discharged 12 or more nautical miles (22.2 km) from shore and compacted or ground food wastes that are capable of passing through a screen with openings no greater than 25 millimetres may be discharged if the vessel is at least 3 nautical miles (4.8 km) from the nearest land. As such, it is not surprising there is very high ‘leakage’ in this category. Yachts disposed of 1,052 tonnes or 11.9% of the total waste disposed of by the tourism sector. The largest contribution to waste by yacht crew and passengers was organic material (33.6%), followed by glass (23.8%), paper and cardboard (15.3%) and plastics (12%). PET (1) accounted for the largest disposed plastic material (75.4%), which suggests the particular importance of reducing and recycling plastic PET containers. However, as shown in Table 21, cruise ships and yachts contributed almost double the amount of PET (117 and 95 T/y respectively) when compared with land-based accommodation (58 T/y). Tourism sector plastic leakage If the tourism sector has the same rates of plastic leakage as Saint Lucia overall (at 14% median estimate), it will produce the following quantities of leakage each year (Table 22). Although PET (1) is collected for recycling in Saint Lucia, it is the second most leaked item in the tourism sector. Saint Lucia could focus on incentivising accommodation facilities, cruise ships, yachts and restaurants to implement water filters to ensure tourists have access to safe water from reusable containers while dis-incentivising provision of small, single-use PET water bottles (250 ml, 300 ml and 500 ml). A significant reduction in plastic leakage could be achieved within Saint Lucia’s tourism sector if private recyclers supported source separation of recyclables. For example, the Rodney Bay Marina recycling station and posterior export could be presented as a successful case study for other marinas, hotels and government authorities to encourage separation and better waste management practices.  Plastic and fisheries  Common plastics in fishing gear The two most common fishing methods within Saint Lucia’s EEZ are trolling lines and hand lines (World Bank, 2019). Both fishing line and nets are made of polyamide or nylon. Other common objects used in fishing are buoys or floats, which can be made of HDPE, compression moulded PVC or rigid foamed polystyrene (NOAA, 2020). Plastic fishing gear includes rope, in addition to fishing vessels made from materials such as fibreglass and plastic antifouling. Along with fishing licences, data on the number of gear sets is collected annually. Table 24 outlines the fisheries sector in Saint Lucia, showing that plastic trolling hand lines are used predominantly. Fish pots are the third most used fishing gear. These hand-hauled fish traps are usually made from wire mesh or bamboo hexagonal mesh Z-traps (FAO, 2018). This fishing method is used in reef and shelf areas, usually in depths of less than 50 metres. Bottom-set gillnets are becoming more common and spear guns and hand lines are used. The vessels used include those used for pelagic fisheries, in addition to a number of smaller wooden vessels powered by smaller capacity engines (FAO, 2018). Plastic materials other than fishing gear A large majority of domestic fishing vessels in Saint Lucia engage in same-day fishing operations. Operators take subsistence items such as food, water and drink containers on board, as well as other plastic-containing materials such as buckets, life jackets, flares and depth-sounding equipment. ALDFG is considered the main source of plastic waste in the marine environment, originating from the fisheries and aquaculture sectors (FAO, 2016). A Caribbean study reported the majority of ALDFG was found underwater (60%) and traps were the most common type of gear (41%), followed by various types of nets (25%) (Matthews, 2009). Derelict fishing gear floating on the ocean surface or resting on the ocean floor can continue to trap non-target organisms in a process known as ghost fishing.  Plastics projects and the fisheries sector The Department of Fisheries has participated in plastic-related projects/initiatives: 2017–2018: Ocean Day initiatives (Plastic-free Week, Public Pledge to reduce plastic use, Ocean awareness campaign) 2017–2019: School and summer camp presentation on the impact of marine plastic followed by clean-up activities Your Plastic, Our Ocean campaign that ran from April–June 2018 Plastic Waste Reduction School competition: audio, poster and video competition Movie feature presentation on ‘Plastic Ocean’ at Caribbean cinemas, schools and public venues May–July 2018: Island-wide presentation to Massy Store staff on the impact of single-use plastic ahead of their implementation of the plastic bag in-store charge Based on fish landings data, the largest fish landing site in Saint Lucia is Vieux Fort followed by Dennery. Infrastructure at this landing site has deteriorated, with fishers lining up by the side of the main road (John Compton Highway) to sell their catch. This practice is hazardous for fishers, buyers and visitors, particularly with increased foot traffic in this area during cruise-ship season. Waste from fishing activities is collected by waste contractors organised by the SLSWMA. Private bins, procured in collaboration with fisher cooperatives and the SLSWMA, are used. Waste collected is disposed of at Deglos Landfill where it is deep-buried together with household and commercial waste. The Fisheries NAP SASAP has identified that the Castries fish-landing site should be upgraded with climate-resilient infrastructure including solar compacter waste collection bins to maintain proper garbage disposal practices, a fishing gear repair area for the repair and storage of plastic nets, and fish vending stalls. Eighty-one per cent (81%) of all interviewees reported that general fisheries waste is offloaded at port and taken to landfill, with 6.3% reporting dumping in the water. When queried about plastic waste disposal, 62% reported that plastics are offloaded at port into a public waste bin located around the port area and taken to landfill; 6.3% of interviewees responded that plastic waste was thrown overboard. A proportion (31.3%) disposed of organic waste into the ocean. Figure 34 shows a high level of marine debris on the shore of Bananes Bay port, which potentially comes from fishing activity.  The fisheries sector contributes 96 tonnes of waste per year or 0.1% of the total waste generated in Saint Lucia annually. A large majority of the waste was organic material, which differs from Antigua and Barbuda and Samoa, where little organic material was found. The 2020 fisheries audit calculated that each fishing vessel disposed of 0.27 kilogram of waste per vessel per day. Plastics were the second largest material disposed of, PET (1) (water bottles and other beverage containers) accounting for 4.9% and Plastic Other (7) at 2.9%. Plastic waste disposal  The fisheries sector plastic disposal is 11 tonnes per year. The most common polymers are PET (1), accounting for the highest percentage (43.5%) of the total plastic waste disposed of annually (Figure 37). Plastic Other (7) accounted for 26.1%, PP (5) represented 15.1% and HDPE accounted for 13.4%. The overall plastic disposal rate is equivalent to 0.20 kilogram per vessel per day. Plastic leakage for consumer activities  If fishing vessels leak at the same rates as other sectors in Saint Lucia, the average annual plastic leakage in 2019 is 1.86 kilograms per boat per year (Table 29).  Plastic leakage in the form of fishing gear (ADLFG) The calculations assume that nylon material (Other 7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type by gear type is shown in Table 32 below. Each country provided import data linked to HS codes related to plastic material in fishing gear. In 2019, the countries in focus imported approximately 8.97 tonnes of fishing gear containing plastic components.  The Saint Lucia fishing fleet comprises approximately 927 vessels, or 0.02% of the world’s 3.7 million-vessel fleet (Rosseau et. al., 2019). Hull scrapings from anti-fouling coatings or composite hull materials lost through wear and cleaning are recognised as a source of microplastic pollution in the ocean. Sundt, Schulze and Syversen (2014) estimate that Norwegian recreational vessels emit around 0.5 kilogram of microplastics per annum. As domestic fishing vessels in Saint Lucia may be larger on average than recreational vessels, it can be estimated that they might shed 1 kilogram per vessel per year. Overall, we estimate with considerable uncertainty that the Saint Lucia fishing fleet sheds 927 kilogram per year of microplastics. Plastic flow analysis Plastic disposal in Saint Lucia  Although the household and commercial sector contributes the largest quantities of waste and plastic in Saint Lucia, the disposal intensity rate and plastic disposal intensity rate indicate that the tourism sector contributes a much larger quantity of waste and plastic per capita (Figure 38). For example, tourists in land-based accommodation dispose of four times as much waste per day as a Saint Lucia resident, while a cruise tourist to Saint Lucia disposes of seven times the amount of a local resident. The overall plastic disposal rate across all sectors – household and commercial, tourism and fisheries – has been estimated at 5,071 tonnes per year. As shown in Figure 39, households dispose of the most plastic waste, generating 3,412 tonnes per year and 18,593 cubic metres annually. Interestingly, households dispose of 3.6 times more plastic waste than commercial businesses and nearly five times more plastic waste than the tourism sector.  PET (1) is the most commonly disposed of plastic polymer by each sector, except for households where Plastic Other (7) represents 41% (Figure 40). Beverage containers are responsible for 23% of all PET (1) material disposed of. Soft plastic packaging and other single-use multi-layer plastic packaging materials are the top disposed of Other (7) plastic items. HDPE in the form of household chemicals and beauty products is the third most common plastic disposed of by all sectors.  A brand audit was not included within the scope of this project. However, a study mapping PET waste quantities in Saint Lucia in 2020 for the RePLAST project found that plastic PET beverage containers from locally owned Du Boulay’s Bottling Company Limited (now merged with Windward & Leeward Brewery Ltd.) was consistently the major component of the waste stream in each of the collection zones (39%), followed by Blue Waters St. Lucia Ltd. (24%) (Unite Caribbean, 2020).  Plastic leakage across sectors  To determine the amount of domestic plastic waste produced each year, customs data for imports of raw plastics, food and drink items and manufactured plastic items were aggregated. For each item imported, a lifespan and the percentage of the imported weight that consisted of plastic that would end up as waste were estimated. different categorisation of plastics in the import and waste stream. Our estimate of leakage was based on a Bayesian model that took as input total waste disposal and imports for each polymer. It was assumed that the true rate of leakage for each polymer was close to the overall leakage rate, and that waste disposal and import figures may have a 10% systematic error, in addition to sampling error and year-to-year variation. These assumptions allow us to use the overall rate of leakage to provide more credible estimates for each individual polymer. (See Appendix C for details of the model.) Overall, we estimated that 14% (95% credible interval: 2%–24%) of imported plastic was leaked or held in long-term reservoirs. If we suppose that the household and commercial, tourism and fishing sectors leak plastic at the same rates as the median estimate for Saint Lucia overall, each sector will have the annual waste leakage rates as shown in Table 36. Plastic leakage per polymer type Material flow analysis of all seven polymer types across the three sectors shows that less than a quarter (14%) of all plastic waste is leaked in Saint Lucia. A majority of plastic waste is managed through traditional landfill methods.  On average, Saint Lucia imports a total of 6,519 tonnes per year of plastics. Figure 41 above outlines the plastic material flow for all seven (7) plastic types over a 12-month period. The audit suggests that 99% of waste generated in Saint Lucia is imported and 5% originates from waste offloaded or discarded from cruise ships. Of all plastic waste produced in Saint Lucia, 4% is exported. On average, 86% of all plastic material imported into Saint Lucia is managed by landfilling post-consumer goods. Less than 1% of all plastics entering Saint Lucia is exported for recycling and 14% is mismanaged and ultimately leaked into the environment.  Figure 42: Plastic flows for Saint Lucia by polymer type In 2018, Saint Lucia introduced the phased prohibition of polystyrene (Styrofoam) and other single-use plastic food-service containers. A complete ban of polystyrene food containers came into effect by August 2020. However, a ban on specific single-use plastic food-service items is yet to be activated. Nevertheless, the number of polystyrene food containers in Saint Lucia’s waste was much smaller than previously audited countries without bans, and smaller than previously audited countries with bans. Plastic bag composition figures for previously audited countries were not adjusted to account for contaminants, so they are likely to be overstated in comparison to Saint Lucia, so the numbers are not comparable.  The Deglos Landfill was constructed 18 years ago with an expected lifespan of 20 years. Because of stakeholder consultation and a waste audit undertaken by APWC, it is now estimated that the landfill has space for an additional 20 years. This timeframe could be expanded if organics and recyclables were segregated and processed. Segregation should be implemented in the household and commercial, tourism and fisheries sectors. APWC recommends that waste be separated into dry-wet components and supports enacting the Returnable Containers Bill for the recovery of plastics and the development of an adequate recycling system.  Bio-based, compostable and other alternatives have been introduced in Saint Lucia after the single-use plastic ban. This provides further support to the requirement of an organics processing facility as currently all alternatives to single-use plastics are ending up at the landfill. Bio-based biodegradable plastics do not necessarily degrade after disposal. Chemical additives used to create certain characteristics, including longevity, release carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere. The organic processing facility could be in the form of an industrial composting facility, anaerobic digester or a biologically active landfill, depending on the type of quantities of feedstock that can be estimated from the data generated by this audit.  Encouraging the use of reusable materials in tourist accommodation facilities could further reduce waste going to landfill. Single-use toiletries should be replaced with refillable containers. Hotels and resorts could install water-refilling stations and ban single-use plastic water bottles.  Nappies (diapers) represent 21% of household plastic waste. APWC recommends the current plastic bans encompass single-use plastic nappies, which could be replaced by reusable nappies or compostable nappies when an industrial composting facility is implemented. The government should consider import regulations to control the type of plastics imported into Saint Lucia, with a focus on recyclability (plastics that are easily recycled and available in large volumes).  Plastic waste leakage represented 14% of all plastic waste. Household collection inadequacy proved to be one of root causes of plastic leakage, with collection trucks arriving late for collections, trucks leaking waste on route to the landfill and no mandated lidded bins for households. Lidded bins in all household and commercial businesses are recommended, as well as implementing a more stringent system to control collections so that these are carried out on time.  In relation to fishing waste, single-use plastics should be banned on board fishing vessels. Avoidance of all other plastic objects on board (plastic pegs, plastic buckets, brooms, etc.) should also be encouraged as they easily and inadvertently get lost at sea. Heavy fines should be imposed for ocean dumping. It is imperative to raise awareness on the impacts of ghost gear and implement best practices to avoid plastic pollution in the fisheries sector. An intensive and extensive education programme could be implemented for fishers, covering plastic pollution, resource recovery and the value of recyclable materials. An educational programme could be carried out through an annual national campaign in collaboration between MinEIGRSD and the Department of Fisheries. This could include an award acknowledging individuals and companies that undertake actions in maintaining a cleaner ocean or a monetary prize. APWC suggests the creation of educational material and awareness campaigns directed at residents, tourists and fishers. Before entering the country, tourists could be instructed (via a video presentation) about the environmental impacts of plastic pollution in Saint Lucia and encouraged to sign a pledge to preserve and protect Saint Lucia. Through this campaign, Saint Lucia could also promote the current plastics ban. Awareness materials and pledge signing could be applied across all OECS countries for tourists upon arrival in the region. Overall, Saint Lucia’s efforts to reduce plastic waste through avoidance and the implementation of small recycling programmes have built a strong foundation to leverage future waste and plastic management programmes.
