The two most common fishing methods within Saint Lucia’s EEZ are trolling lines and hand lines (World Bank, 2019). Both fishing line and nets are made of polyamide or nylon. Other common objects used in fishing are buoys or floats, which can be made of HDPE, compression moulded PVC or rigid foamed polystyrene (NOAA, 2020). Plastic fishing gear includes rope, in addition to fishing vessels made from materials such as fibreglass and plastic antifouling. Along with fishing licences, data on the number of gear sets is collected annually. Table 24 outlines the fisheries sector in Saint Lucia, showing that plastic trolling hand lines are used predominantly. Fish pots are the third most used fishing gear. These hand-hauled fish traps are usually made from wire mesh or bamboo hexagonal mesh Z-traps (FAO, 2018). This fishing method is used in reef and shelf areas, usually in depths of less than 50 metres. Bottom-set gillnets are becoming more common and spear guns and hand lines are used. The vessels used include those used for pelagic fisheries, in addition to a number of smaller wooden vessels powered by smaller capacity engines (FAO, 2018). A large majority of domestic fishing vessels in Saint Lucia engage in same-day fishing operations. Operators take subsistence items such as food, water and drink containers on board, as well as other plastic-containing materials such as buckets, life jackets, flares and depth-sounding equipment. ALDFG is considered the main source of plastic waste in the marine environment, originating from the fisheries and aquaculture sectors (FAO, 2016). A Caribbean study reported the majority of ALDFG was found underwater (60%) and traps were the most common type of gear (41%), followed by various types of nets (25%) (Matthews, 2009). Derelict fishing gear floating on the ocean surface or resting on the ocean floor can continue to trap non-target organisms in a process known as ghost fishing.  The Department of Fisheries has participated in plastic-related projects/initiatives: Based on fish landings data, the largest fish landing site in Saint Lucia is Vieux Fort followed by Dennery. Infrastructure at this landing site has deteriorated, with fishers lining up by the side of the main road (John Compton Highway) to sell their catch. This practice is hazardous for fishers, buyers and visitors, particularly with increased foot traffic in this area during cruise-ship season. Waste from fishing activities is collected by waste contractors organised by the SLSWMA. Private bins, procured in collaboration with fisher cooperatives and the SLSWMA, are used. Waste collected is disposed of at Deglos Landfill where it is deep-buried together with household and commercial waste. The Fisheries NAP SASAP has identified that the Castries fish-landing site should be upgraded with climate-resilient infrastructure including solar compacter waste collection bins to maintain proper garbage disposal practices, a fishing gear repair area for the repair and storage of plastic nets, and fish vending stalls. Eighty-one per cent (81%) of all interviewees reported that general fisheries waste is offloaded at port and taken to landfill, with 6.3% reporting dumping in the water.  The fisheries sector contributes 96 tonnes of waste per year or 0.1% of the total waste generated in Saint Lucia annually. A large majority of the waste was organic material, which differs from Antigua and Barbuda and Samoa, where little organic material was found. The 2020 fisheries audit calculated that each fishing vessel disposed of 0.27 kilogram of waste per vessel per day. Plastics were the second largest material disposed of, PET (1) (water bottles and other beverage containers) accounting for 4.9% and Plastic Other (7) at 2.9%. The fisheries sector plastic disposal is 11 tonnes per year. The most common polymers are PET (1), accounting for the highest percentage (43.5%) of the total plastic waste disposed of annually (Figure 37). Plastic Other (7) accounted for 26.1%, PP (5) represented 15.1% and HDPE accounted for 13.4%. The overall plastic disposal rate is equivalent to 0.20 kilogram per vessel per day. If fishing vessels leak at the same rates as other sectors in Saint Lucia, the average annual plastic leakage in 2019 is 1.86 kilograms per boat per year (Table 29).  The calculations assume that nylon material (Other 7) in fishing gear is the most frequently leaked polymer of all fishing gear (85%), followed by HDPE (5%), plastics other than nylon (2%) and PVC (less than 1%). A breakdown of polymer type by gear type is shown in Table 32 below. The Saint Lucia fishing fleet comprises approximately 927 vessels, or 0.02% of the world’s 3.7 million-vessel fleet (Rosseau et. al., 2019). Hull scrapings from anti-fouling coatings or composite hull materials lost through wear and cleaning are recognised as a source of microplastic pollution in the ocean. Sundt, Schulze and Syversen (2014) estimate that Norwegian recreational vessels emit around 0.5 kilogram of microplastics per annum. As domestic fishing vessels in Saint Lucia may be larger on average than recreational vessels, it can be estimated that they might shed 1 kilogram per vessel per year. Overall, we estimate with considerable uncertainty that the Saint Lucia fishing fleet sheds 927 kilogram per year of microplastics. In relation to fishing waste, single-use plastics should be banned on board fishing vessels. Avoidance of all other plastic objects on board (plastic pegs, plastic buckets, brooms, etc.) should also be encouraged as they easily and inadvertently get lost at sea. Heavy fines should be imposed for ocean dumping. It is imperative to raise awareness on the impacts of ghost gear and implement best practices to avoid plastic pollution in the fisheries sector. An intensive and extensive education programme could be implemented for fishers, covering plastic pollution, resource recovery and the value of recyclable materials. An educational programme could be carried out through an annual national campaign in collaboration between MinEIGRSD and the Department of Fisheries. This could include an award acknowledging individuals and companies that undertake actions in maintaining a cleaner ocean or a monetary prize.
